singapore

singapore (singapura, 新加坡) is a city-state in southeast asia that became independent from the british in 1965 and is now one of the world’s leading economic centres in shipping and banking. combining the skyscrapers and subways of a modern, affluent city with a mix of chinese, malay, arab, and indian influences alongside a tropical climate, tasty food from hawker centres, copious shopping malls, and vibrant night-life scene, this garden city makes a great stopover or springboard into the region.

singapore is a microcosm of asia, populated by malays, chinese, indians, and a large group of workers and expatriates from all across the world.

singapore

singaporean food is legendary, with bustling hawker centres and 24-hour coffee shops offering cheap food from all parts of asia, and shoppers can bust their baggage allowances in shopping centres like orchard road and suntec city. in recent years some societal restrictions have also loosened up, and now you can bungee jump and dance on bar tops all night long, although alcohol is still very pricey and chewing gum can only be bought from a pharmacy for medical use.

two casino complexes — or "integrated resorts", to use the singaporean euphemism — opened in 2010 in sentosa and marina bay as part of singapore's new fun and entertainment drive, the aim being to double the number of tourists visiting and increase the length of time they stay within the country. see do, gambling below.

history[edit]

the first records of singapore date back to the second and third centuries where a vague reference to its location was found in greek and chinese texts, under the names of savana (σαβάνα) and pu luo chung respectively.

according to legend, srivijayan prince sang nila utama landed on the island and, catching sight of a strange creature that he thought was a lion, decided to find a new city he called singapura, sanskrit for lion city, c. 1299. alas, there have never been any lions anywhere near singapore (until the singapore zoo opened) or elsewhere on malaya in historical times, so the mysterious beast was more probably a tiger or wild boar.

more historical records indicate that the island was settled at least two centuries earlier and was known as temasek, javanese for "sea town", and an important port for the sumatran srivijaya kingdom. however, srivijaya fell around 1400 and temasek, battered by the feuding kingdoms of siam and the javanese majapahit, fell into obscurity.

as singapura, it then briefly regained importance as a trading centre for the melaka sultanate and later, the johor sultanate. however, portuguese raiders then destroyed the settlement and singapura faded into obscurity once more.

the story of singapore as we know it today began in 1819, when sir thomas stamford raffles made a deal with a claimant to the throne of the sultanate of johor: the british would support his claim in exchange for the right to set up a trading post on the island.

though the dutch initially protested, the signing of the anglo-dutch treaty in 1824, which separated the malay world into british and dutch spheres of influence (resulting in the current malaysia-indonesia and singapore-indonesia borders), ended the conflict. the dutch renounced their claim to singapore and ceded their colony in malacca to the british, in exchange for the british ceding their colonies on sumatra to the dutch.

yawning proboscis monkey, singapore zoo

well-placed at the entrance to the straits of malacca, straddling the trade routes between china, india, europe, and australia, raffles' master stroke was to declare singapore a free port, with no duties charged on trade. as traders flocked to escape onerous dutch taxes, the trading post soon grew into one of asia's busiest, drawing people from far and wide. along with penang and malacca, singapore became one of the straits settlements and a jewel in the british colonial crown. its economic fortunes received a further boost when palm oil and rubber from neighbouring malaya were processed and shipped out via singapore.

in 1867, singapore was formally split off from british india and became a directly ruled crown colony.

when world war ii broke out, fortress singapore was seen as a formidable british base, with massive naval fortifications guarding against assault by sea. however, not only did the fortress lack a fleet, as all ships were tied up defending britain from the germans, but the japanese wisely chose to cross malaya by bicycle instead!

despite hastily turning the guns around, this was something the sea-focused british commanders had not considered, and on 15 feb 1942, with supplies critically low after less than a week of fighting, singapore was forced to surrender. the british prisoners of war were packed off to changi prison. tens of thousands perished in the subsequent brutal japanese occupation. the return of the british in 1945 to one of their most favoured colonies was triumphalist.

granted self-rule in 1955, singapore briefly joined the federation of malaysia in 1963 when the british left, but was expelled because the chinese-majority city was seen as a threat to malay dominance. the island became independent on 9 august 1965, thus becoming the only country to gain independence against its own will in the history of the modern world!

the subsequent forty years rule by prime minister lee kuan yew saw singapore's economy boom, with the country rapidly becoming one of the wealthiest and most developed in asia despite its lack of natural resources, earning it a place as one of the four east asian tigers. now led by lee's son lee hsien loong, the ruling people's action party (pap) continues to dominate the political scene. societal restrictions have been loosened up in recent years though, with the government trying to shake off its staid image, and it remains to be seen how the delicate balancing act between political control and social freedom will play out.

districts[edit]

singapore is a small island country. with a population size of over 5.5 million people it is a very crowded city, the world's second-most densely populated country behind only monaco. however,unlike many other densely populated countries, singapore - with more than 50 percent of its area covered by greenery and with over 50 major parks and 4 nature reserves. additionally, large self-contained residential towns have mushroomed all over the island, around the clean and modern city centre.

the centre of the city is located in the south — consisting roughly of the orchard road shopping area, the riverside, the new marina bay area and also the skyscraper-filled shenton way financial district known, in acronym-loving singapore, as the cbd (central business district).

riverside (civic district) — singapore's colonial core, with museums, statues and theatres, not to mention restaurants, bars and clubs.

orchard road — a 2.2 kilometre-long major road with lots of shopping malls.

marina bay — the newest feature of singapore, dominated by the marina bay sands integrated resort and the marina barrage. the newly opened gardens by the bay is a large public garden with a cluster of gigantic super trees.

bugis and kampong glam — bugis and kampong glam are singapore's old malay district, now largely taken over by shopping

chinatown — the area originally designated for chinese settlement by raffles, now a chinese heritage area popular with tourists.

little india — a piece of india to the north of the city core.

balestier, newton, novena and toa payoh — budget accommodations and burmese temples within striking distance of the centre.

north — the northern part of the island, also known as woodlands, forms singapore's residential and industrial hinterlands. singapore zoo and bird park is located here.

west — the western part of the island form singapore's residential areas with star vista.

jurong— home to nanyang technological university and the last housing frontier before the industrial area. attractions include singapore science centre and singapore discovery centre.

north east — home to many residential towns with a heart of serangoon nex, hougang mall and compass point

tampines — a residential town located in the heartlands, in the far east of the island close to changi airport.

east coast — the largely residential eastern part of the island contains changi airport, miles and miles of beach and many famous eateries. also covers geylang serai, the true home of singapore's malays.

sentosa — a separate island once a military fort developed into a resort, sentosa is the closest that singapore gets to disneyland, now with a dash of gambling and universal studios thrown in.

north west — the aspiring north-west that goes into the undeveloped jungles, and the military training areas (ama keng, lim chu kang, cemeteries, kranji camp and safti).

culture[edit]

despite its small size, singapore has a diversity of languages, religions, and cultures. former prime ministers of singapore, lee kuan yew and goh chok tong, have stated that singapore does not fit the traditional description of a nation, calling it a society-in-transition, pointing out the fact that singaporeans do not all speak the same language, share the same religion, or have the same customs. each singaporean's behaviours and attitudes are influenced by, among other things, his or her home language and religion. singaporeans who speak english as their native language tend to lean toward western culture, while those who speak chinese as their native language tend to lean toward chinese culture and confucianism. malay-speaking singaporeans tend to lean toward malay culture, which itself is closely linked to islamic culture. racial and religious harmony is regarded by singaporeans as a crucial part of singapore's success, and played a part in building a singaporean identity.

when singapore became independent from the united kingdom in 1963, most singaporean citizens were transient labourers who had no intention of staying permanently. there was also a sizeable minority of middle-class, locally born people—known as peranakans or baba-nyonya—descendants of 15th- and 16th-century chinese immigrants. with the exception of the peranakans who pledged their loyalties to singapore, most of the labourers' loyalties lay with their respective homelands of malaysia, china and india. after independence, the government began a deliberate process of crafting a singaporean identity and culture. singapore has a reputation as a nanny state. the government also places heavy emphasis on meritocracy, where one is judged based on one's ability.

the national flower of singapore is the hybrid orchid, vanda 'miss joaquim', named in memory of a singapore-born armenian woman, who crossbred the flower in her garden at tanjong pagar in 1893. many national symbols such as the coat of arms of singapore and the lion head symbol of singapore make use of the lion, as singapore is known as the lion city. major religious festivals are public holidays.

geography[edit]

singapore consists of 63 islands, including the main island, pulau ujong. there are two-man-made connections to johor, malaysia: the woodlands 1st link in the north and the tuas 2nd link in the west. jurong island, pulau tekong, pulau ubin and sentosa are the largest of singapore's smaller islands. the highest natural point is bukit timah hill at 163.63 m (537 ft).[194] under british rule, christmas island and the cocos islands were part of singapore, but both were transferred to australia in 1957. pedra branca is the nation's easternmost point.

land reclamation projects had increased singapore's land area from 580 km2 (220 sq mi) in the 1960s to 710 km2 (270 sq mi), an increase of 22% (130 km2). the country is projected to reclaim another 766 km2 (300 sq mi). some projects involve merging smaller islands through land reclamation to form larger, more functional islands, as has been done with jurong island. the type of sand used in reclamation is found in rivers and beaches, rather than deserts, and is in great demand worldwide. singapore imported almost 15 million tons of sand for its projects, the demand being such that indonesia, malaysia, and vietnam have all restricted or barred the export of sand to singapore in recent years. as a result, singapore switched to using polders for reclamation, in which an area is enclosed and then pumped dry.

climate[edit]

singapore is one-and-a-half degrees north of the equator, lying entirely between the 1st and 2nd parallels. singapore's climate is classified as tropical rainforest climate (köppen climate classification af), with no true distinct seasons. owing to its geographical location and maritime exposure, its climate is characterized by uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity and abundant rainfall. therefore, it is almost always warm and wet. the average annual rainfall is around 2,340 mm (92.1 in). the highest 24-hour rainfall figures ever recorded in history were 512.4 mm (20.2 in) (2 december 1978) at paya lebar, 467 mm (18.4 in) (1969) and 366 mm (14.4 in) (19 december 2006).

the temperature hovers around a diurnal range of a minimum of 25 °c (77.0 °f) and a maximum of 33 °c (91.4 °f). may is the hottest month of the year in singapore, followed by june. this is due to light winds and strong sunshine during those months. the highest recorded temperature is 37.0 °c (98.6 °f) on 17 april 1983. the lowest recorded temperature was 19.0 °c (66.2 °f) in 14 february 1989 at paya lebar. temperature often goes above 33.2 °c (91.8 °f) and can reach 35 °c (95 °f) at times.

relative humidity has a diurnal range in the high 90s in the early morning to around 60% in the mid-afternoon, but does go below 50% at times. during prolonged heavy rain, relative humidity often reaches 100%. generally, there is much more rainfall on the western side of the island than on the eastern portion of singapore, owing to a rain shadow effect.

thus, the eastern side of singapore is much drier and slightly hotter than western singapore. this can cause slight weather disparities from one side of the island to the other. this is significant to note because even a small hill such as bukit timah hill can cause this phenomenon. despite singapore's small size, there may be sunshine on one side while there is rain on the other.

further contrasts that prevent true all-year uniformity are the monsoon seasons which happen twice each year. the first one is the northeast monsoon which occurs from mid-november to early march. the second is the southwest monsoon season which occurs from june to september. periods between monsoon seasons receive less rain and wind. during the northeast monsoon, northeast winds prevail, sometimes reach 20 km/h (12 mph). there are cloudy conditions in december and january with frequent afternoon showers.

spells of widespread moderate to heavy rain occur lasting from 1 to 3 days at a stretch. it is relatively dry in february till early march although rainfall still exceeds 120mm. it is also generally windy with wind speeds sometimes reaching 30 to 50 km/h (19 to 31 mph) in the months of january and february. during the southwest monsoon season, southeast winds prevail. isolated to scattered showers occur in the late morning and early afternoon. early morning "sumatras" – squall lines that originate over nearby sumatra – are common.

holidays[edit]

there are eleven public holidays in singapore. each major local race and religion have two holidays each in addition to the secular holidays of new year's day, labour day and national day. for the chinese, chinese new year (two days) and the buddhist holiday vesak day (one day) are also observed. for the hindus, deepavali (one day) is celebrated. for the muslims, the two islamic holidays of hari raya aidil fitri (one day on 1 syawal) and hari raya aidil adha (one day on 10 zulhijah) are celebrated. as for the christians, the two christian holidays of good friday and christmas day (25 december) are celebrated. these public holidays have been recognised since singapore's 1966 holidays act.

there are generally 11 public holidays a year. however, due to the differences between the islamic calendar and the gregorian calendar, hari raya aidil fitri and hari raya aidil adha are respectively celebrated twice in a gregorian calendar year

if any public holiday falls on a sunday in singapore, the following day is declared to be a public holiday if it is not itself already a public holiday. the president is empowered to declare any day to be observed as a public holiday in addition to or substitution for any day specified in the schedule to the holidays act, and may also declare any day in a year to be observed as an additional public holiday when in that year two public holidays fall on the same day.

if any public holiday falls on a saturday in singapore, the following monday is declared as a school holiday for students in primary & secondary schools, only if that monday is not a public holiday itself.

new year decorations, chinatown

the year kicks off with a bang on 1 jan and new year, celebrated in singapore just as in the west with a fireworks show and parties at every nightspot in town. particularly famous are the wet and wild foam parties on the beaches of resort island sentosa.

due to the influence of the chinese majority, arguably the largest event is chinese new year (农历新年) or, more politically correctly, lunar new year, usually held in february. while this might seem to be an ideal time to visit, many smaller shops and eateries close for 2-3 days during the period, though supermarkets, department stores and high-end restaurants remain open. the whole festival stretches out for a full 15 days, but the frenzied buildup to the peak occurs just before the night of the new moon, with exhortations of gong xi fa cai (恭喜发财 "congratulations and prosper"), red tinsel, mandarin oranges and the year's zodiac animal emblazoned everywhere and crowds of shoppers queuing in chinatown, where there are also extensive street decorations to add spice to the festive mood. the two following days are spent with family and most of the island comes to a standstill, and then life returns to normal... except for the final burst of chingay, a colourful parade down orchard road held ten days later.

gong xi fa cai singapore style there are a few twists to the singapore way of celebrating chinese new year, particularly the food, which bears little resemblance to the steamy hotpots of northern china. the top dish is bak kwa (肉干), sweet barbecued pork, followed closely by yu sheng (魚生), a salad of shredded vegetables and raw fish enthusiastically tossed into the air by all present. favourite desserts are crumbly sweet pineapple tarts and gooey steamed nian gao (年糕) cakes. red packets of money (红包 ang pow) are still handed out generously, but unlike in china, in singapore you only need to start paying up once married.

on the fifth day of the fifth month of the chinese calendar, the dragon boat festival (端午节) is celebrated to commemorate a chinese folk hero. as part of the celebrations, rice dumplings, which in singapore are sometimes wrapped in pandan leaves instead of the original bamboo leaves, are usually eaten. in addition, dragon boat races are often held at the singapore river on this day. the seventh month of the chinese lunar calendar — usually august — starts off with a puff of smoke, as "hell money" is burned and food offerings are made to please the spirits of ancestors who are said to return to earth at this time. this is the hungry ghost festival (中元节), when the living get together to stuff themselves and watch plays and chinese opera performances. following soon afterwards, the mid-autumn festival (中秋节) on the 15th day of the 8th lunar month (sep/oct) is also a major event, with elaborate lantern decorations — particularly in jurong's chinese garden — and moon cakes filled with red bean paste, nuts, and more consumed merrily.

the hindu festival of lights, diwali, known locally as deepavali, is celebrated around october or november and little india is brightly decorated for the occasion. at around january-february, one may witness the celebration of thaipusam, a tamil hindu festival in which male devotees would carry a kavadi, an elaborate structure which pierces through various parts of his body, and join a procession from the sri srinivasa perumal temple in little india to the sri thandayuthapani temple in tank road. female devotees usually join the procession carrying pots of milk instead. about one week before deepavali is thimithi, the fire-walking festival where one can see male devotees walking on burning coals at the sri mariamman temple in chinatown.

the islamic month of ramadan and eid-ul-fitr or hari raya puasa as it is called here, is a major occasion in malay parts of town, particularly geylang serai on the east coast, which is lit up with extensive decorations during the period. another festival celebrated by the malays is eid-ul-adha, known locally as hari raya haji, which is the period when muslims make the trip to mecca to perform in hajj. in local mosques, lambs contributed by the faithful are sacrificed and their meat is used to feed the poor.

the buddhist vesak day, celebrating the birthday of the buddha sakyamuni, plus the christian holidays of christmas day, for which orchard road is extensively decorated, and good friday round out the list of holidays.

a more secular celebration occurs on 9 aug, national day, when fluttering flags fill singapore and a spectacular national day parade is held to celebrate singapore's independence.

date name remarks

1 january new year's day start of gregorian year.

january/february chinese new year a two-day holiday. an important chinese festival celebrated at the turn of the traditional chinese calendar.

march/april good friday a christian holiday commemorating the crucifixion of jesus christ and his death at calvary.

1 may labour day may day (or labour day) is celebrated as a mark of solidarity amongst workers.

may/june vesak day a holiday observed traditionally by hindus and buddhists.

9 august national day in commemoration of singapore's independence from malaysia in the year 1965.

october/november deepavali hindu festival of lights celebrated every year in autumn.

25 december christmas day an annual festival commemorating the birth of jesus christ.

1st shawwal hari raya aidilfitri an important religious holiday celebrated by muslims that marks the end of ramadan, the islamic holy month of fasting (sawm).

10th dhu al-hijjah hari raya aidiladha observed by muslims.

addresses[edit]

in the centre, singapore's addressing system is fairly similar to western countries (such as 17 orchard road), but the new housing developments on the outskirts may appear more intimidating: a typical address might be "blk 505 jurong west st 51 #01-186". here, "blk 505" is the housing block number (blk = block), "jurong west" is the area, while "st 51" is the street name/number, and "#01-186" means floor 1 unit number 186, stall or shop 186. the first digit of both housing block and street number is the neighbourhood's number (in this case 5), making it easier to narrow down the right location. there are also 6-digit postal codes, which, considering the small size of the island, generally correspond to exactly one building. for example, "blk 9 bedok south ave 2" is "singapore 460009". finally, you will also encounter malay terms in addresses: the most common are jalan (jln) for "road", lorong (lor) for "lane", bukit (bt) for "hill" and kampong (kg) for "village".

useful tools for hunting down addresses include streetdirectory.com, gothere.sg and onemap.sg.

events[edit]

singapore holds numerous events each year. some of its famous festivals and events include the singapore food festival, the singapore grand prix, the singapore arts festival, the chingay parade, the world gourmet summit and zoukout.

the ultra singapore (客路新加坡ultra电音节) musical festival is another popular festival in singapore, and line-up featured renowned acts such as kygo and afrojack. christmas is also widely celebrated in singapore, a season where the city streets and shopping malls along its famous shopping belt orchard road are lit up and decorated with vibrant colours. in addition, the singapore jewel festival attracts numerous tourists every year, and is a display of precious gems, famous jewels and masterpieces from international jewellers and designers.

get in[edit]

banned in singapore: there's more to the list than just porn and drugs:

airsoft handcuffs, even if pink and fuzzy self-defence weapons such as batons, tasers and pepper spray feeding pigeons or monkeys (in and around nature reserves, to protect the animals and the environment) chewing gum (note: the sale of chewing gum is banned; possession of chewing gum for personal consumption has never been illegal)

singapore airlines a380

all foreign travellers entering singapore need to fill in an electronic immigration card known as the sg arrival card three days (including the day of arrival) before your arrival in singapore. you will need an email address, and there is no hardcopy version. this includes returning from short-trips to malaysia and indonesia. the sg arrival card is free of charge, do not use websites that claim to provide sg arrival card for a fee! if your phone is dead or you forget to submit the sg arrival card in advance, there is a small area in the immigration checkpoints with free wi-fi and tablets to help you submit the sg arrival card.

immigration checkpoints in singapore is now mostly automated and first-time travellers from 51 countries/cities can use the automated gantries which will record your biometrics (iris, face and thumbprint) for clearance. afterwards, a social visit pass endorsement will be sent to your email on how long you can stay in singapore.

visas[edit]

singapore has a relatively-easy visa policy: most foreigners can enter singapore without a visa for up to 30 days. exceptions and modifications to the rule are listed below:

citizens of saudi arabia may enter singapore visa-free, with the maximum stay given at the discretion of the immigration officers at the point of entry. citizens of all european union member states, plus argentina, australia, new zealand, norway, south korea, switzerland, the united kingdom and the united states can enter singapore without a visa for up to 90 days. visa-free entry for british passport holders who do not have right of abode in the united kingdom is shortened to 30 days. citizens of afghanistan, algeria, armenia, azerbaijan, bangladesh, belarus, egypt, georgia, india, iran, iraq, jordan, kazakhstan, kosovo, kyrgyzstan, lebanon, libya, mali, moldova, morocco, nigeria, north korea, pakistan, russia, somalia, south sudan, sudan, syria, tajikistan, tunisia, turkmenistan, ukraine, uzbekistan and yemen are required to have a visa to enter singapore. refer to the immigration and checkpoints authority website for current guidelines. citizens of the commonwealth of independent states countries, plus georgia, india, moldova, turkmenistan and ukraine may now enter singapore for up to 96 hours (4 days) without a visa, provided they have a valid onward air ticket. additional requirements are imposed for indian citizens, see the visa free transit facility section of the ica website for more information.

customs[edit]

singapore has very strict drug laws, and drug trafficking carries a mandatory death penalty or caning — which is applied to all persons entering singapore. whether singapore is just your quick flight connection or final destination, you are liable for drug trafficking penalties if the drugs are found in your possession. it is also illegal to have drugs inside your body even if the drugs were consumed outside of singapore as it is still considered drug consumption within singapore under the misuse of drugs act. while there are changing attitudes towards drugs in other countries, the singapore government still treats all form of narcotics including cannabis seriously and there is no exemption for anyone.

therefore, refuse if asked by anyone you don't know or barely know (such as a new "friend" or travel partner you met while staying in a hostel) to transport their luggage or package or to check it in (to an airline, bus company or the train to malaysia) for them on your luggage allowance. if caught, you will be the one who will be liable for any narcotics found inside. definite red flag if offered a hefty compensation to transport the unknown item. no amount of money offered is worth the chance. unlike certain countries, the authorities here do not just simply fine and deport travellers if they are found with narcotics. if the authorities have a strong case against you, they will not hesitate to charge you with drug trafficking which can be punishable by the mandatory death penalty. this applies to anyone regardless of gender, nationality, race or income.

bring prescriptions for any medicines you may have with you, and obtain prior permission from the health sciences authority before bringing in any sedatives (eg valium/diazepam) or strong painkillers (eg codeine). hippie types may expect a little extra attention from customs, but getting a shave and a haircut is no longer a condition for entry.

duty free allowances for alcohol are 1l each of wine, beer and spirits, and the 1l of spirits may be substituted with 1l of wine or beer, unless you are entering from malaysia. travellers entering from malaysia are not entitled to any duty free allowance. alcohol may not be brought in by persons under the age of 18. there is no duty free allowance for cigarettes: all cigarettes legally sold in singapore are stamped "sdpc", and smokers caught with unmarked cigarettes may be fined $500 per pack. (in practice, though, bringing in one opened pack is usually tolerated.) if you declare your cigarettes or excess booze at customs, you can opt to pay the tax or let the customs officers keep the cigarettes until your departure. the import of chewing gum for resale is technically illegal, and in practice customs officers would not bother with a reasonable quantity brought in for personal consumption.

pornography, pirated goods and publications by the jehovah's witnesses and the unification church may not be imported to singapore, and baggage is scanned at air, land and sea entry points. in theory, all entertainment media including movies and video games must be sent to the board of censors for approval before they can be brought into singapore, but that is rarely if ever enforced for original (non-pirated) goods. pirated cds or dvds, on the other hand, can land you fines of up to $1000 per disc.

by plane[edit]

singapore is southeast asia's largest aviation hub, so unless you're coming from peninsular malaysia or batam/bintan in indonesia, the easiest way to enter singapore is by air. in addition to flag-carrier singapore airlines [2] and its regional subsidiary silkair, singapore is also home to low-cost carriers tiger airways, jetstar asia and scoot.

in addition to the locals, every carrier of any size in asia offers flights to singapore, with pan-asian discount carrier airasia and malaysian regional operator firefly operating dense networks from singapore. there are also direct services to europe, the middle east, australia, new zealand, north america, and even south africa. singapore is particularly popular on the "kangaroo route" between australia and europe, with airlines like klm, mann travel, british airways, etihad airways and emirates using singapore as the stopover point.

changi airport[edit]

as befits the country's main airport's major regional hub status, changi airport (iata: sin) and officially the 'best airport in the world' (see skytrax) is large, pleasant and well organized, with immigration and baggage distribution remarkably fast. the airport is split into three main terminals (t1, t2 and t3) and a new fourth terminal, t4 which serves mainly budget carriers and airlines with point-to-point (non-transit) flights.

figuring out which terminal your flight arrives in or departs from can be complicated: for example, singapore airlines uses both t2 and t3, and only announces the arrival terminal two hours prior landing. fortunately, transfers are quite easy, as the three main terminals are connected with the free skytrain service, which can be used without passing through immigration. all three main terminals are also physically connected to each other, and by walking that you will not notice you're in a different terminal except by reading the signs. your departing terminal is more straightforward as singapore airlines designates t2 as departures for destinations in south east asia, the indian subcontinent, the middle east and africa while all other destinations will use t3. when you return to the airport and are leaving singapore via singapore airlines, be sure to at least tell the driver your destination so they knows which terminal to take you to.

unlike most other airports, there are no separate zones for departing and arriving passengers in the main terminals prior to passport control hence arriving passengers are free to shop and eat at the airside establishments if they are not in a hurry to meet someone or catch prearranged transportation. in addition, if they have no luggage checked-in from their point of origin, they can clear passport control at any terminal.

an exception to this is the new fourth terminal, t4. built mainly for budget carriers like airasia, cebu pacific and spring airlines, the terminal is physically separate from the other three main terminals and has separate zones for departing and arriving passengers. a complimentary 24-hour airport shuttle bus service plies between terminal 2 and terminal 4, with the journey taking approximately 10 minutes. passengers can then use the free skytrain service or walk using the inter-terminal travellators to continue onwards to terminal 1 and terminal 3.

if you have over 5h to spare there are free city tours five times a day departing from the airport. to register for any of the tours, simply approach the staff at the free singapore tours (fst) registration booth located in:

terminal 2: near the escalators to north arrival immigration and skytrain station at transit mall north, level 2 (near transfer lounge e) terminal 3: next to transfer lounge b at transit mall north, level 2 if you are at terminal 1, you can proceed to terminal 2 for registration. for terminal 4, enquire with the nearest information counter.

even if stuck in the airport, there are plenty of ways to kill time, as each terminal has a unique design and the airside areas of t1, t2, and t3 are attractions in themselves. t2, arguably the most interesting, has an indoor garden, a music listening area with couches and mood lighting, a computer gaming room, a small movie theatre, paid massage services, and of course plenty of duty-free shops. t3 has a butterfly garden and plenty of natural light, but fewer entertainment options. t1 has a swimming pool for $13.91 and jacuzzi, both open until 23:00. t4, the newest, features a 'heritage zone' with a mini theatrical performance titled 'peranakan love story' and a free-to-play arcade located near gate g17. you can travel between the three main terminals without passing through immigration and, if you have no checked-in luggage to collect, you can clear passport control and customs at any terminal. as noted above, terminal 4 is an exception to this, and you can travel to this terminal only if you have a flight departing from here.

in all terminals, internet access is provided free of charge, both wirelessly and via some 200 terminals and kiosks, there are some xbox systems set up to keep gamers entertained, and there's live lounge music at times. there are also singtel and starhub payphones that offer unlimited free local calls. atms abound and money changers offer reasonable rates as well, although you pay a small premium compared to the city. food options are varied and generally reasonably priced, with some choice picks including the peranakan-themed soup restaurant (t2 landside), which serves much more than just soup, and sakae sushi (t2 airside). if you're up for a little adventure, seek out the staff canteen at level 3m of the car park next to t2, it's open to the public (with discounts for airport staff) and serves local food. it is relatively cheap compared to other food options in the airport but not exactly cheap compared to elsewhere in singapore. there are also staff canteens in terminals 1 and 3.

terminals t1, t2 and t3 all have airside (ie accessible without passing through immigration) transit hotels. ☎ +65 6541 9106 or book on-line via the ambassador transit hotel website. a 6h "block" for a single/double/triple costs $73.56/82.39/110.35, budget singles (shared bathroom) $51.50, extensions $17.65 per hour. you can rent a shower (without a room) to freshen up for $8.40. the plaza premier lounges also offer a basic but functional gym with shower for $8.40 with a singapore airlines boarding pass.

jewel changi airport is a new terminal structure intended as a mix-use complex situated on a 3.5 hectare site where the terminal 1 car park now resides. essentially a new multi-storey underground car park will replace the existing facilities, while an indoor garden, with a waterfall, is built above. the new building is located between the three existing terminal buildings, enabling passengers to transfer via the new complex, whilst being an attraction and shopping destination in itself. the design will consist of a circular structure, reminiscent of a doughnut, with a large garden located at the centre and water falling from the edge of the circular atrium opening.

as part of the project, terminal 1 will be expanded to allow more space for the arrival hall, baggage claim areas and taxi bays. these enhancements will increase t1’s passenger handling capacity to 24 million passenger movements per annum.

sim cards - do not purchase the $50 tourist sim card you see at the changi recommends counter on arrival. it's expensive and really, really poor value. instead, find yourself a convenience or telco store, and ask for the regular prepaid sim cards locals use (ids required for registration). from the airport there are a number of ways to get into the city:

the ground transport desk, is a 24-hour counter located in the arrival hall of each terminal. it offers flat fee transport options to any destination in singapore, which is a pretty good deal especially when the taxi queue is long or after midnight(beat the queue, skip the surcharge). simply visit the ground transport desk located at the arrival hall of each terminal to book. options include:

airport shuttle: shuttle service will bring you directly to the doorstep of designated downtown hotels. available 24/7, this is a convenient and affordable option (adult $9 l children $6). departs every 15-30min.

4-seater or 7-seater vehicle: a 4-seater is $55, and 7-seater is $60 per trip to any destination in singapore.

limousines: charge a flat $50 to any destination in singapore.

taxi - follow the signs after clearing customs. it includes $3-5 additional surcharge for all taxis departing the airport. an additional 50% surcharge applies between midnight and 06:00.

mrt - mrt trains run from a station between t2 and t3, to tanah merah. from there, you have to change trains for travelling to the city and the western part of singapore. however, you can also interchange at expo and take the downtown line to tampines, macpherson, chinatown, city centre and bukit panjang.

bus - bus services 24, 27, 34, 36, 53, 110 and 858 passes through terminals 1, 2 and 3; whereas only 24, 34, 36 and 110 passes through terminal 4. fares are less than $2.00, exact fare required (no change given) if you pay cash.

seletar airport[edit]

seletar airport (iata: xsp), completed in 1928 and first used for civil aviation in 1930, is singapore's first airport. while later airports like kallang and paya lebar have been closed and turned into a military airbase respectively, seletar is still in use to this day. singapore air charter offer access to private planes based at the airport available for charter, and companies such as air charter advisors offer charter flights to seletar with access to business jet rentals around the world.

currently, seletar airport is mostly used by general aviation aircraft and some commercial flights (e.g. see firefly flights from singapore seletar - kuala lumpur subang) so be extra cautious when booking flights. arriving via seletar airport is only recommended if you are arriving from kuala lumpur and travelling via subang airport would make more sense for you. travel by road and public transportation from changi airport takes about 30-45 minutes, but allow for more time as it is difficult to navigate and find seletar's commercial terminal as it is located far from the central touristy area.

from the airport you would need to take bus service 102 to sengkang, buangkok and hougang, before continuing their journey anywhere by bus or mrt, which is north east line towards the city and harbourfront area. you can make interchanges towards the circle line at serangoon and dhoby ghaut, downtown line at little india and chinatown, north south line at dhoby ghaut and east west line at outram park.

if you are heading to changi airport, take service 102 until you reach the jalan kayu roundabout. transfer to service 858 bound for changi airport. do note that service 858 does not serve changi airport terminal 4 at the point of time of writing this article.

by road[edit]

the causeway, with johor bahru on the other side

singapore is linked by two land crossings to peninsular malaysia:

the causeway is a very popular and thus terminally congested entry point connecting woodlands in the north of singapore directly into the heart of johor bahru. while congestion isn't as bad as it once was, the causeway is still jam-packed on friday evenings (towards malaysia) and sunday evenings (towards singapore). the causeway can be crossed by bus, train, taxi or car, but it is no longer feasible to cross on foot since malaysia shifted their customs and immigration complex 2 km inland.

a second crossing between malaysia and singapore, known as the second link, has been built between tuas in western singapore and tanjung kupang in the western part of johor state. much faster and less congested than the causeway, it is used by some of the luxury bus services to kuala lumpur and is strongly recommended if you have your own car. there is only one infrequent bus across the second link, and only malaysian "limousine" taxis are allowed to cross it (and charge rm150 and up for the privilege). walking across is also not allowed, not that there would be any practical means to continue the journey from either end if you did.

driving into singapore with a foreign-registered car is rather complicated and expensive; see the land transport authority's driving into & out of singapore guide for the administrative details. peninsular malaysia-registered cars need to show that they have valid road tax and malaysian insurance coverage. other foreign cars need a vehicle registration certificate, customs document (carnet de passages en douane), vehicle insurance purchased from a singapore-based insurance company and an international circulation permit. all foreign registered cars and motorcycles can be driven in singapore for a maximum of 10 days in each calendar year without paying vehicle entry permit (vep) fees, but after the 10 free days have been utilised, you will need to pay a vep fee of up to $35/day.

go through immigration first and get your passport stamped. then follow the red lane to buy the autopass ($10) from the lta office. at the parking area, an lta officer will verify your car, road tax and insurance cover note and issue you a small chit of paper which you take to the lta counter to buy your autopass and rent an in-vehicle unit (iu) for road pricing charges (or opt to pay a flat $5/day fee instead). once that is done, proceed to customs where you will have to open the boot for inspection. after that, you are free to go anywhere in singapore. any vep fees, road pricing charges and tolls will be deducted from your autopass when you exit singapore. this is done by slotting the autopass into the reader at the immigration counter while you get your passport stamped.

driving into malaysia from singapore is relatively uncomplicated, although small tolls are charged for all crossings. in addition, singapore-registered vehicles are required to have their fuel tanks at least 3/4 full before leaving singapore. do be sure to change some ringgit before crossing, as singapore dollars are accepted only at the unfavourable rate of 1:1. moreover, be prepared for longer queues as malaysia introduced a biometric system for foreigners wishing to enter that country (see malaysia article).

in both directions, car hire agencies often prohibit their vehicles from crossing the border or charge extra.

by bus[edit]

direct to/from malaysian destinations there are buses to/from kuala lumpur (kl) and many other destinations in malaysia through the woodlands checkpoint and the second link at tuas. unfortunately, there is no central bus terminal and different companies leave from all over the city. major operators include:

kkkl, ☎ +65 6348 6909, [x]. no frills, but the buses have good legroom, provide free wifi service on board and use the second link. its departure point at katong v, marine parade provides convenience to changi airport arrival passengers and residents in the east area of singapore from $30 one-way. aeroline, ☎ +65 6258 8800, [x]. luxury buses with meal on-board, power sockets, lounge area etc, to kuala lumpur and petaling jaya. departures from harbourfront centre. from $47 one-way. first coach, ☎ +65 6822 2111, [x]. no frills, but the buses have good legroom and use the second link. another selling point is convenient public transport: buses depart from novena square (novena mrt) in singapore and arrive right next to bangsar lrt in kuala lumpu, $33/55 single/return. nice, ☎ +65 62565755, [x]. over 20 daily departures from kuala lumpur's old railway station. double-decker nice 2 buses (27 seats) rm80, luxury nice++ buses (18 seats) rm88. departures from copthorne orchid hotel on dunearn rd. transnasional, ☎ +60 2 6294 7034 (malaysia), [x]. malaysia's largest bus operator, offers direct buses from singapore through the peninsula. departures from lavender st. executive/economy buses myr80/35. transtar, ☎ +65 6299 9009, [x]. transtar's sleeper-equipped solitaire ($63) and leather-seated first class ($49) coaches are currently the best around with frills like massaging chairs, onboard attendants, video on demand and even wifi. more plebeian supervip/executive buses are $25/39, direct service to malacca and genting also available. departures from golden mile complex, beach rd (near lavender mrt). most other operators have banded together in two shared booking portals. many, but by no means all, use the golden mile complex shopping mall near bugis as their singapore terminal.

12go asia, ([email protected]), [x]. 12go asia covers many destinations by bus, flights, ferries and trains. redbus singapore, ☎ +65-31582888 ([email protected]), [x]. redbus singapore includes many destinations bus tickets. bus online ticket, [x]. lots of bus companies, including major operator fivestars express, golden coach express, delima express, 707 express and airasia-affiliated starmart. easybook, ☎ +65 6444 0745, [x]. six bus companies including major budget operator konsortium.

in general, the more you pay, the faster and more comfortable your trip. more expensive buses leave on time, use the second link, and don't stop along the way; while the cheapest buses leave late if at all, use the perpetually jammed causeway and make more stops. book early for popular departure times like friday and sunday evening, chinese new year, etc, and factor in some extra time for congestion at the border.

an alternative to taking a direct "international bus" is to make the short hop to johor bahru to catch domestic malaysian long-distance express buses to various malaysian destinations from the larkin bus terminal. besides having more options, fares may also be lower because you will be paying in malaysian ringgit rather than singaporean dollars. the downside is the time-consuming hassle of first getting to johor bahru and then getting to larkin terminal on the outskirts of town.

to/from johor bahru

buses between johor bahru and singapore

line stops in singapore stops in jb price

causeway link cw1 kranji mrt only larkin $1.50

causeway link cw2 queen st only larkin only $3.50

causeway link cw3 jurong east mrt only bukit indah via 2nd link $4.00

causeway link cw4 pontian link jurong east mrt only $4.00

causeway link cw5 newton circus only larkin $3.30

causeway link cw6 boon lay only bukit indah $4.00

causeway link cw7 tuas link mrt only iskandar puteri $4.00

advance coach ac7 yishun mrt ciq $2.50

transtar ts1 changi airport ciq $10.00

transtar ts3 marina square ciq $7.00

transtar ts6 star vista gp sentral $7.00

transtar ts8 resorts world sentosa ciq $7.00

sbs 170 (red plate) queen st via kranji larkin only $2.50

sbs 170x (blue plate) kranji mrt jb sentral only $2.00

sbs 160 jurong east mrt via kranji jb sentral only $2.50

smrt 950 woodlands mrt via marsiling jb sentral only $2.20

singapore-johor express queen st only larkin only $3.30

the most popular options to get to/from johor bahru are the buses listed in the table. there's a pattern to the madness: singaporean-operated buses (sbs, smrt, sje) can only stop at one destination in malaysia, while the malaysian-operated causeway link buses can only stop at one destination in singapore. terminals aside, all buses make two stops at singapore immigration and at malaysian immigration. at both immigration points, you must disembark with all your luggage and pass through passport control and customs, then board the next bus by showing your ticket. figure on one hour for the whole rigmarole from end to end, more during rush hour.

by train[edit]

malaysia's keretapi tanah melayu (malayan railway or ktmb) operates a shuttle train service between woodlands train checkpoint in singapore and jb sentral in johor bahru. while less frequent and more expensive than buses, and the woodlands ktmb station is a bus ride away from the mrt system, the trains have dedicated immigration and custom checks areas separated from the very busy road checkpoints, and get you across the causeway without getting stuck in traffic. for trains to various destinations in malaysia, see johor bahru#by train and malaysia#by train.

the shuttle tebrau service runs 17 trips per day from jb sentral, and 14 trips per day from woodlands:

jb sentral to woodlands: 05:00, 05:25, 05:55, 06:20, 07:30, 08:40, 09:50, 11:20, 12:50, 14:20, 15:30, 16:40, 17:50, 19:00, 20:10, 21:20, 22:30 woodlands to jb sentral: 07:20, 08:30, 09:40, 10:50, 12:20, 13:50, 15:20, 16:30, 17:40, 18:50, 20:00, 21:10, 22:20, 23:30

gates open 30 minutes before each departure for immigration clearance and boarding, and close 10 minutes before departure. for departures from woodlands train checkpoint, avoid arriving very early as there are very limited facilities, and toilets are only available after immigration. photography and video recording are prohibited at the train checkpoint.

tickets are priced at rm5 (s$1.67) for jb-woodlands and s$5 for woodlands-jb. return tickets are priced double in the currency of the point of origin, making jb-woodlands-jb rm10 (s$3.33) and woodlands-jb-woodlands s$10. tickets can be bought up to 30 days in advance, either in person at ktmb ticket counters or online through the ktmb e-ticketing website, and sold up to 15 minutes before departure if still available. booking in advance is recommended, as the service is popular among commuters and weekend shoppers, in particular weekday mornings departures from jb sentral (usually snatched up as soon as tickets are released for booking 30 days in advance) and weekend evenings departures from jb sentral (usually sold out on the morning of departure).

for jb sentral-woodlands, at jb sentral there are turnstiles installed at the departure gate (gate a); scan the barcode or qr code on your ticket (can be one stored on a mobile device) to activate the turnstile. for woodlands-jb sentral, tickets bought online must be exchanged at the ktmb ticket counter before departure.

going to malaysia, both singapore and malaysia immigration checks are conveniently done at woodlands before boarding. firstly singapore stamps you out, then walk over to the adjacent hall to get stamp in by malaysia. in the reverse direction, malaysian exit immigration checks are carried out at jb sentral before boarding, and singapore immigration checks are done upon arrival at woodlands.

getting to/from woodlands train checkpoint

there is a bus stop and a taxi stand right outside the train checkpoint.

bus to/from mrt: buses connect the train checkpoint with kranji, marsiling and woodlands mrt stations. the nearest station is marsiling (1.6 km away), but more buses go to woodlands. from mrt stations, ensure that the bus goes to woodlands train checkpoint; ask the driver to be certain that the bus goes to the "ktm station".

bus to/from city: at the train checkpoint bus stop, sbs 170 (red plate) goes via kranji mrt station to queen st in the city, as well as larkin sentral in johor bahru in the other direction. pay attention to the bus destination sign or ask the driver to ensure you board the correct bus. alternatively, use the overhead bridge (following signs to "woodlands checkpoint") to cross over to the bus arrival hall at the road checkpoint and take an express bus to the city. this option is less useful as you have to wait for the express bus to come from across the border, and you have to pay the fare in singapore dollars which you would have paid in malaysian ringgits if you have just taken the bus directly from johor bahru. coming from the city, however, you should take bus 170 (red plate) from queen st, or use the mrt and transfer to bus as above. avoid taking a direct express bus from the city, as the bus would bring you straight to the road checkpoint. despite being located in the same immigration checkpoint complex and having similar names, woodlands train checkpoint is a separate facility from the much larger and busier woodlands checkpoint for road vehicles. if you mistakenly end up in woodlands checkpoint and see immigration counters in front of you, you are better off proceeding with immigration clearance and taking a bus across the border, giving the train a miss. backtracking is not normally allowed without a strong reason, you will be interviewed by immigration officers before being escorted out of the checkpoint, wasting time and you will still miss the train anyway.

by taxi[edit]

there is also the option of taking a taxi between singapore and johor bahru. the main advantage is that you do not need to lug your stuff (or yourself) through immigration and customs at both ends; you can just sit in the car.

while normal taxis are not allowed to cross the border, specially licensed taxis can be taken from larkin bus terminal in johor bahru (rm80 per taxi, or rm20 per person if you share with others), and ban san st taxi kiosk (same place as queen st bus terminal) in singapore ($48 per taxi or $12 per person). both singapore-registered and malaysian-registered taxis are available. singapore-registered taxis can bring you to anywhere in singapore but can only go to larkin in johor bahru, while malaysian-registered taxis can bring you to anywhere in malaysia but can only go to ban san st in singapore. drop-off points other than the taxi terminal in the destination country may incur additional charges; check with the driver before boarding. booking is available by phone from pengurusan terminal teksi johor bahru-singapore (malaysian taxis) at ☎ +60 7 222 5898 or +60 7 224 6986, and singapore-johore taxi operators’ association (singapore taxis) at ☎ +65 6296 7054.

a combination ride from anywhere in singapore to anywhere in malaysia can also be arranged, but you'll need to swap taxis halfway through: this will cost $55 and up, paid to the singaporean driver. the most expensive option is to take a limousine taxi specially licensed to take passengers from any point to any destination, but only a few are available and they charge a steep rm150 upwards per trip starting from malaysia, or $130 upwards per trip starting from singapore. advance booking is highly recommended, ☎ +60 7 599 1622.

by boat[edit]

ferries link singapore with the neighbouring indonesian province of riau islands and the malaysian state of johor.

singapore has five ferry terminals which handle international ferries: harbourfront (formerly world trade centre) near sentosa, marina bay cruise centre in marina bay, tanah merah ferry terminal on the east coast, as well as changi ferry terminal and changi point ferry terminal, both at the eastern side of the island near the airport.

getting to/away from the ferry terminals:

harbourfront ft: located next to harbourfront mrt station. marina bay cruise centre: the shuttle to marina bay mrt station is the obvious choice. tanah merah ft: get off at bedok mrt station and catch bus no. 35 to ferry terminal. changi ft: no bus stop nearby, take a taxi from changi village or tanah merah mrt. changi point ft: take bus no. 2, 29 or 59 to changi village bus terminal and walk to the ferry terminal.

to/from indonesia[edit]

to/from batam: ferries to/from batam centre, batu ampar (harbour bay), sekupang and waterfront city (teluk senimba) use harbourfront ft, while ferries to/from nongsapura use tanah merah ft. operators at harbourfront include:

penguin, ☎ +65 6271 4866 in harbourfront ☎+62 778 467574 in batam centre ☎+62 778 321636 in sekupang ☎+62 778 381280 in waterfront city . virtually hourly ferries to/from batam centre and sekupang, fewer ferries to/from waterfront city. $16/20 one-way/return before taxes and fuel surcharge.

indo falcon, ☎ +65 6278 3167. hourly ferries to batam centre, fewer to waterfront city. this company does not operate to/from sekupang. similar fares.

berlian/wave master, ☎ +65 6546 8830. operates 16 trips to/from batu ampar. fares are similar to the other companies.

dino/batam fast, ☎+65 6270 0311 in harbourfront ☎ +62 778 467793, +62 778 470344 in batam centre ☎ +62 778 325085, +62 778 3250856 in sekupang ☎ +62 778 381150 in waterfront city, [3]. also hourly ferries to/from batam centre, fewer ferries to/from sekupang and waterfront city. $14/20 one-way/return before taxes and surcharges.

at tanah merah:

dino/batam fast, ☎ +65 6270 0311 in singapore ☎ +62 778 761071 in nongsa, [4]. around 8 ferries daily to/from nongsa, the resort area on the northeastern tip of batam. $16/22 one-way/return before taxes and surcharges. to/from bintan: all ferries for bintan use tanah merah ferry terminal. for tanjung pinang, there are total of 6 ferries a day, increasing to 9 during weekends. $25/35 one-way/return before taxes and surcharges. operators include:

dino/batam fast, ☎ +65 6542 6310 in tanah merah, [5].

penguin, ☎ +65 6542 7105 in tanah merah ☎+62 771 315143 in tanjung pinang ☎ +62 770 696120 in lobam, [6].

indo falcon, ☎ +65 65426786 in tanah merah, [7]

berlian/wave master, ☎ +65 6546 8830 in tanah merah.

for bintan resorts (bandar bentan telani), bintan resort ferries, ☎ +65 6542 4369, [8] operates five ferries from tanah merah ft on weekdays, increasing to 7 during weekends. $34.60/50.20 one-way/return peak period, $26.60/39.20 one-way/return off-peak including taxes and fuel surcharge.

to/from karimun: tanjung balai is served by penguin and indofalcon from harbourfront, with six ferries total on weekdays, increasing to 8 during weekends. $24/33 one-way/return including taxes and fuel surcharge.

to/from malaysia[edit]

ferries shuttle from singapore to southeastern johor and are handy for access to the beach resort of desaru. the scheduled ferry service to tioman was discontinued in 2003.

pengerang/ tanjung pengelih: bumboats shuttle between changi point ferry terminal at changi village, 51 lorong bekukong, ☎ +65 6545 2305, +65 65451616, and pengerang, a village at the southeastern tip of johor. boats ($10 per person, $2 per bicycle one-way) operate 07:00-19:00 and leave when they reach the 12-passenger quota.

sebana cove resort, desaru: ferries to/from tanah merah ferry terminal operated by indo falcon, ☎ +65 6542 6786 in tanah merah. three ferries daily except tue. $48(a)/38(c) return including taxes and fuel surcharge.

tanjung belungkor, desaru: cruise ferries ☎ +65 65468518, +65 65468675, operates passenger ferries from changi ferry terminal three times daily, departures at 10:00, 17:00, 20:00 $22 return. the previous car ferry service has been suspended.

cruises[edit]

star cruises offers multi-day cruises from singapore to points throughout southeast asia, departing from harbourfront ft. itineraries vary widely and change from year to year, but common destinations include malacca, klang (kuala lumpur), penang, langkawi, redang and tioman in malaysia, as well as phuket, krabi, ko samui and bangkok in thailand. there are also several cruises every year to borneo (malaysia), sihanoukville (cambodia), ho chi minh city (vietnam) and even some 10 night long hauls to hong kong. an all-inclusive 2 night cruise may cost as little as $400 per person in the cheapest cabin class if you book early, but beware the numerous surcharges and note that non-residents may be charged significantly higher rates.

singapore is also a popular stop for round-the-world and major regional cruises including those originating from as far as japan, china, australia, europe and north america. many of those cruises embark/disembark passengers here, while others pay port visits. check with cruise companies and sellers for details.

get around[edit]

map of singapore, with mrt lines and key attractions

getting around singapore is easy: the public transportation system is extremely easy to use and taxis are reasonably priced when you can get one. very few visitors rent cars. gothere.sg, citymapper singapore and google maps does a pretty good job of figuring out the fastest route by mrt and bus and even estimating taxi fares between any two points.

you can now also use your visa or mastercard that has contactless payment (e.g. paywave) on public transport. you can also link your visa/mastercard to apple pay or google pay on your phone to enter the buses/mrt. however, do note that there is a s$0.50 fee applied per posting (fares are accumulated daily and posted at the end of day) for foreign visa/mastercard/apple pay/google pay. there are no fees for singaporean cards though.

as such, if you are staying in singapore for some time or are planning to return to singapore several times in the future, the ez-link contactless rfid farecard or a nets flash pay card might be a worthwhile purchase. those who are familiar with hong kong's octopus card, london underground's oyster card, washington dc's smartrip card or japan railway's ic cards will quickly understand the concept of the ez-link and nets flashpay card. you can store value on it and use it on the mrt trains as well as all city buses at a 15% discount. the card costs $12, including $7 stored value, and the card can be "topped up" in increments of at least $10 at the farecard vending machines or 7-eleven stores (the latter will allow a top-up for a convenience fee). you can return the card to get unused credit out but not the $5 non refundable card fee. the card technology was changed, but if you have any old cards lying around, they can be exchanged for free with value intact at transitlink offices in all mrt stations.

alternatively, the singapore tourist pass available at selected major mrt stations (including changi airport and orchard) also includes ez-link card functionality and a variety of discounts for attractions. the pass includes unlimited travel on mrt and non-premium buses, and costs $10 for 1 day, $16 for 2 days, or $20 for 3 days (together with a $10 rental deposit refunded if this card is returned within 5 days after purchase). the passes are valid until the end of operating hours on the day they expire.

commuters can pay by cash for bus only. one reason is that all bus services serves or ends at the bus interchange nearer to the mrt stations is one point whereby when the fare is low. in the case of buses it delays everyone else because the driver has to count the distance to tell you how much you need to pay. in addition, no change is given for the bus and you will need to buy a separate ticket if you intend to transfer to another bus later in your journey.

distance fares have been available . all commuters will be charged a fare according to the total distance travelled, on the bus, lrt and mrt, and make transfers without incurring additional cost.

by rail[edit]

mrt system map

the mrt (mass rapid transit) and lrt (light rail transit) are trains that are the main trunk of singapore's transit system. they are a cheap, safe, and very reliable mode of transportation, and the network covers many points of interests for tourists. ez-link or nets flashpay farecards (described above) are the easiest and most popular ways to use the mrt. all lines are seamlessly integrated, even if the lines are operated by different transport companies, so you do not need to buy a new ticket to transfer. all train lines use contactless rfid tickets. just tap to scan your train ticket at the fare gate when entering and exiting the train service area. alternatively, commuters can also use credit or debit cards under simplygo, and commuters can also upgrade these existing stored value cards into simplygo network.

in addition, the minimum top-up amount in the general ticketing machines (gtms) is $2, down from $5 or $10 previously. this is to encourage all visitors who are on short-term basis, who find it challenging to top up the cards including primary school children; continue your journey and enjoy cost savings using these cards.

up to 45 minutes is allowed for each transfer between rail and bus services, and up to 15 minutes is allowed for transfers between different rail stations. exceeding this duration will result in a new journey being charged the next time you tap in. additionally, the maximum time allowed in the mrt/lrt network is 120 minutes. your stored value card will be rejected by the fare gate if you exceed this duration and you would need to pay an administrative charge of $2 either at the passenger service centre or, if you are at an unmanned lrt station, the general ticketing machine or assisted service kiosk in order to exit the fare gate.

mrt stations are clean and usually equipped with free public toilets. however, toilets are located outside the paid area at most stations, which means that for most journeys, you cannot stop for a toilet break without tapping out. all underground stations are air-conditioned, while above-ground stations are equipped with high-volume low-speed fans for passenger comfort. eating and drinking is not allowed on trains or at train platforms, and it is also worth noting that mrt stations do not have rubbish bins (although rubbish bins can easily be found outside mrt stations, such as in nearby shopping malls or at bus stops).

underground stations have platform screen doors between the train and the platform while most above-ground stations have half-height platform screen doors (hhpsds) to prevent commuters from falling onto the tracks.

by bus[edit]

buses connect various corners of singapore, but are slower and harder to use than the mrt. the advantage though of this is you get to see the sights rather than a dark underground tunnel at a low price. you can pay cash (coins) in buses, but the fare stage system is quite complex (it's easiest to ask the driver for the price to your destination), you are charged marginally more and there is no provision for getting change. payment with ez-link or nets flashpay card is thus the easiest method: tap your card against the reader at the front entrance of the bus when boarding, and a maximum fare is deducted from the card. when you alight, tap your card again at the exit, and the difference is refunded. make sure you tap out, or you'll end up paying the maximum fare! inspectors occasionally prowl buses to check that everybody has paid or tapped, so those who are on tourist day passes should tap before sitting down. dishonest bus commuters risk getting fine $20 for not paying or underpaying fares (by premature tapping-out) and $50 for improper use of concession cards. another advantage of ez-link or nets flashpay cards is that you will be able to enjoy distance-based fares and avoid the boarding fee.

after midnight on fridays, saturdays and before public holidays only, the nightrider services are a fairly convenient way of getting around, with seven lines running every 20min. all services drive past the major nightlife districts of boat quay, clarke quay, mohamed sultan and orchard before splintering off. there's a flat fare of $4.00, the ez-link card is accepted but the singapore tourist pass is not valid on this line.

as mentioned earlier, gothere.sg will give you options as to which buses will take you from your origin or destination.

by taxi[edit]

taxis utilize meters and are reasonably priced and honest, however, a shortage of taxis in singapore means that they are often unavailable for hours at a time. outside weekday peak hours, trips within the city centre should not cost you more than $10 and even a trip right across the island from changi to jurong will not break the $35 mark. if you are in a group of 3 or 4, it's sometimes cheaper and faster to take a taxi than the mrt. be aware, however, that taxis are often remarkably difficult to secure, especially during peak commute or shopping hours, or when there is inclement weather. the advent of ride-sharing apps (see below) has mitigated this somewhat, though do expect surcharges during periods of high demand.

taxi pricing is largely identical across all companies at $3.20-$3.90 as a flag down rate (depending on the type of vehicle used), which lasts you 1km before increments of $0.22 per 400m (for the first 10km) or $0.22 per 350m (after the first 10km). (the sole exception is smrt's giant black chryslers, which charge $5 and then $0.30 per 385m.) watch out for surprises though: there are a myriad of peak hour (25%), late night (50%), central business district ($3), trips from airport or the irs ($3-$5 during peak hours), phone booking ($3.00 and up) and electronic road pricing surcharges, which may add a substantial amount to your taxi fare. all such charges are shown on the bottom right-hard corner of the meter, recorded in the printed receipt and explained in tedious detail in a sticker on the window; if you suspect the cab driver is trying to pull a fast one, call the company and ask for an explanation. note that there is no surcharge for trips to the airport. while all taxis are equipped to handle (and are required to accept) credit cards, in practice many cabbies do not accept electronic payment. always ask before getting in. paying by credit card will incur an additional surcharge of 17%. during rush hour in the city centre, or late at night on the weekends, it's wise to call for a taxi from the unified booking system at ☎ +65 6342 5222 (6-dial-cab). some taxi companies offer booking via sms, online and mobile app.

despite the costs involved, taxis may sometimes take you to distant locations outside the cbd faster than mass transport. an airport trip from the city centre may take less than 20min on a taxi but more than 30min on an mrt.

in the central business district, taxis may pick up passengers only at taxi stands (found outside any shopping mall) or buildings with their own driveways (including virtually all hotels). outside the centre, you're free to hail taxis on the street or call one to your doorstep. at night spots featuring long queues, such as clarke quay, you may on occasion be approached by touts offering a quick flat fare to your destination. this is illegal and very expensive but reasonably safe for you. (drivers, on the other hand, will probably lose their job if caught.)

some singapore taxi drivers have very poor geographical knowledge and may expect you to know where they should go, so it may be helpful to bring a map of your destination area or directions on finding where you wish to go. it may also be helpful to write down the address of your destination. some cabbies may also ask you which route you want to take; most are satisfied with "whichever way is faster".

by ride-share[edit]

the major rideshare competitors uber and grab have consolidated into a single grab app with complete coverage and presence in singapore. before arriving, download the grab ride-hailing app. rides are reasonably priced and the app also allows users to hail conventional taxis. grab also has a cheaper grabhitch option where you can share the car with strangers and the disadvantage is longer waiting time. most international credit/debit cards are accepted on the app, and grab notably allows you to pay using cash as well. other options include ryde and gojek which offers competitive prices as well.

by trishaw[edit]

trishaws(like rickshaws) are less popular these days in singapore, but you’ll find them along most of the tourist routes. they’re now managed by a queue system called trishaw uncle. you’ll pay about $40 sgd ($30 usd) for a 30-minute run.

by boat[edit]

bumboat sailing on the singapore river past the esplanade theatres

tourist-oriented bumboats cruise the singapore river, offering point-to-point rides starting from $3 and cruises with nice views of the cbd skyscraper skyline starting from $13.

bumboats also shuttle passengers from changi village to pulau ubin ($2.50 one-way), a small island off singapore's northeast coast which is about as close as singapore gets to unhurried rural living.

by car[edit]

car rental is not a popular option in singapore. it is also hardly necessary for tourists since public transport sufficiently covers all areas of the island with a significant population base. you will usually be looking at upwards for $100 per day for the smallest vehicle from the major rental companies, although local ones can be cheaper and there are sometimes good weekend prices available. this does not include gas at around $1.80/litre or electronic road pricing (erp) fees, and you'll usually need to pay extra to drive to malaysia. if planning on touring malaysia by car, it makes much more sense to head across the border to johor bahru, where both rentals and petrol are half price, and you have the option of dropping your car off elsewhere in the country. this also avoids the unwelcome extra attention that singapore-registered plates tend to get from thieves in malaysia.

roads in singapore are in excellent condition and driving habits are generally good with most people following the traffic rules due to stringent enforcement, though road courtesy tends to be sorely lacking. compared to other major cities around the world like sydney, tokyo or hong kong, parking spaces are comparatively easier to find in the city centre of singapore, although peak hour congestion can be quite severe. foreign licences in english are valid in singapore for up to a year from your date of entry, after which you will have to convert your foreign license to a singapore one. foreign licences not in english must be accompanied by an international driving permit (idp) or an official english translation (usually available from your embassy) for them to be valid.

singapore is a right hand drive country. you drive on the left side of the roadway and the driving age is 18. the speed limit is only 90km/h on expressways and 60km/h on all other roadways.

erp payments require a stored-value cashcard, which is usually arranged by the rental agency, but it's your responsibility to ensure it has enough value. erp gantries are activated at different times, usually in the expected direction of most cars. as a rule of thumb, gantries found in roads leading to the cbd are activated during the morning rush hour while gantries found in roads exiting the cbd are activated during the evening rush hour. passing through an active erp gantry with insufficient value will mean that an alert is sent to your registered address. you will need to pay an administrative fee in addition to the difference between the remaining amount and the actual charge. you have a limited time to settle this otherwise your penalty becomes heavier.

all passengers must wear seatbelts and using a phone while driving is banned. drink-driving is not tolerated: the maximum blood alcohol content is 0.08%, with roadblocks set up at night to catch offenders, who are heavily fined and possibly jailed. even if your blood alcohol level does not exceed the legal limit, you can still be charged with drink driving if the police are convinced that your ability to control the vehicle has been compromised by the presence of alcohol (i.e. if you get involved in an accident). the police do conduct periodic roadblocks and speed cameras are omnipresent. fines will be sent by mail to you or your rental agency, who will then pass on the cost with a surcharge. if stopped for a traffic offense, don't even think about trying to bribe your way out.

by thumb[edit]

hitchhiking is virtually unheard of in singapore, and given the size of the country and its cheap, ubiquitous public transport, it's hardly necessary. plus, it's also highly illegal.

by bicycle[edit]

bicycles are more commonly used in singapore as a form of recreation rather than as a substitute for public transportation. while the city is small and its landscape is flat, it can be difficult to predict how ridable a route will be without scoping it out first. weather can also be a problem, as the tropical humidity and heat make it unpleasant to engage in physical activity outdoors. the air quality also plummets when the thick smoke from indonesian fires descends on singapore. this period usually arrives during the mid-year when indonesia farmers perform the "slash and burn" method of removing waste crops.

however, bicycling is gradually becoming a more common mode of transportation, especially with the advent of station-free bike-sharing services like sg bike. these bikes can be easily found at major pedestrian-transit areas like bus stops and outside shopping malls, and can be rented using a simple smartphone app for a very low price.

small folding bicycles may be taken on the mrt during certain times of the day, but large bicycles are a no-no. bicycles may cross the causeway to malaysia (on motorbike lanes), but are not allowed on expressways.

alternatively, consider cycling in the many nature reserves and parks that dot the island. list of cycling friendly lanes cycling in the east coast park is a favourite pastime for many of the locals on weekends and is also a very good way to see the eastern coast of singapore. parks are connected by an extensive park connector network. cycles are available for rental at one of the many pit stops along the network. the cycles can be rented at any one of the pit stops and returned at any of the other shops.

on foot[edit]

singapore is very pedestrian-friendly. in the main business district and on main roadways, pavements and pedestrian crossings are in good shape and plentiful. drivers are mindful of marked crossing zones, but are less likely to be aware or respectful of pedestrians crossing at street corners on less busy streets where pedestrian crossings are not marked, even though by law any accident between a pedestrian and a vehicle is presumed to be the driver's fault. jaywalking is illegal and punishable with fines of $25 and up to three months in jail. this is, however, rarely (if ever) enforced.

an unavoidable downside, though, is the tropical heat and humidity, which leaves many visitors sweaty and exhausted, so bring along a handkerchief and a bottle of water. it's best to get an early start, pop into air-conditioned shops, cafes, and museums to cool off, and plan on heading back to the shopping mall or hotel pool before noon. alternatively, after sundown, evenings can also be comparatively cool.

a useful tip to combat the tropical weather is to look out for air-conditioned underground pedestrian crossings. these climate-controlled walkways are plentiful and often located between shopping malls and high-rise office buildings. in addition, look out for the pedestrian walkways connecting to underground mrt stations. some stations can have up to 25 different walkways connecting to different entrances/exits in the area, creating an extensive network of walkways around the downtown core that gives one the impression of a city underneath the city.

in recent years, there have been a number of fatal pedestrian accidents due to e-bikes or kick scooters riding on sidewalks. e-bike users in singapore often ride directly on sidewalks at very high speeds, some with little regard for pedestrian safety. families with small children should be especially watchful of e-bikes when walking in singapore.

classic walks in singapore include walking down the river from the merlion through the quays, trekking along the southern ridges walk or just strolling around chinatown, little india or bugis.

on kick scooter[edit]

kick scooters are a good alternative to walking, taking less than a quarter of the time depending on the distance you are going. they're especially useful for getting around the riverside area visiting places like clarke quay, boat quay, parliament house, supreme court, the merlion and the war memorial park, where everything is in walking distance but walking feels a little dreadful.

kick scooters are a convenient way of getting around, especially when combined with public transport. it's much easier to take a kick scooter on the mrt, compared to a foldable bicycle. as opposed to bicycles, kick scooters are allowed on pedestrian walkways, as long as you are mindful of other pedestrians around you.

on motorcycle[edit]

you can also rent motorcycles to ride around the city and even to malaysia. find those rentals with comprehensive insurance in singapore and malaysia. do take note that your driving licence from your home country is in english, otherwise an international driver's licence is needed. helmets are compulsory when riding motorcycles in singapore.

harley-davidson of singapore, 253 alexandra road,postal code 159936, ☎ +65 6475 0123 ([email protected]), [x]. 0900-1900hrs. $88 onwards.

by autonomous (driverless) vehicle[edit]

singapore became the first country in the world to trial on-demand driverless taxis, allowing passengers to book a ride in a self-driving vehicle through the grab ride-hailing app by selecting the "robo-car" fleet icon during booking. this partnership between nutonomy and grab has proven to be successful and popular with riders. however, tourists may find it challenging to access these driverless taxis as the current trial is limited to the one-north business district in singapore.

a tourist-friendly alternative is the autorider at the gardens by the bay, asia's first fully operational self-driving vehicle. tourists can ride the driverless vehicle between bayfront plaza and the flower dome to see more of the gardens. on-board commentary is also provided so passengers can learn more about self-driving vehicle technology and the garden surroundings. visitors need to collect a timeslot coupon from the autorider counter at bayfront plaza before purchasing tickets. tickets ($5 per individual) are sold on a time-allocated basis. upd: ceased operations.

talk[edit]

who are the people in your neighbourhood? the big 3 — chinese, malays and indians — get all the press, but there are plenty of other communities with their own little neighbourhoods (or shopping malls) in singapore:

arabs: arab street burmese: peninsula plaza, on north bridge rd chinese: waterloo street (singapore's 'new chinatown') filipinos: lucky plaza, on orchard rd french: serangoon gardens indonesians: city plaza, near paya lebar mrt japanese: robertson quay and clarke quay, especially the liang court shopping mall, plus cuppage plaza, opposite the somerset mrt and takashimaya along orchard road koreans: tanjong pagar rd peranakan chinese: katong scandinavians: pasir panjang thais: golden mile complex, beach rd tibetans: beatty lane, near lavender mrt and pasir ris vietnamese: joo chiat rd

singapore has four official languages: english, malay, mandarin, and tamil.

english is the lingua franca and the main language used in business, government, law and education. the constitution of singapore and all government legislations are written in english, and interpreters are required if a language other than english is used in the singaporean courts. statutory corporations conduct their businesses in english, while any official documents written in a non-english official language such as malay, mandarin, or tamil are typically translated into english to be accepted for use.

malay was designated as a national language by the singaporean government after independence from britain in the 1960s to avoid friction with singapore's malay-speaking neighbours of malaysia and indonesia. it has a symbolic, rather than functional purpose. it is used in the national anthem ‘’majulah singapura’’, in citations of singaporean orders and decorations and in military commands. singaporean malay is officially written in the latin-based rumi script, though some singaporean malays also learn the arabic-based jawi script. jawi is considered an ethnic script for use on singaporean identity cards.

singaporeans are mostly bilingual, typically with english as their common language and their mother-tongue as a second language taught in schools, in order to preserve each individual's ethnic identity and values. english is the most spoken language at home at 36.9% of the population, just ahead of mandarin. nearly half a million speak other varieties of chinese, mainly hokkien, teochew, and cantonese, as their home language, although the use of these is declining in favour of mandarin or just english. singapore chinese characters are written using simplified chinese characters. singaporean english is largely based on british english, owing to the country's status as a former crown colony. however, forms of english spoken in singapore range from standard singapore english to a colloquial form known as singlish, which is discouraged by the government as it claims it to be a substandard english creole that handicaps singaporeans, presenting an obstacle to learning standard english and rendering the speaker incomprehensible to everyone except to another singlish speaker.

singlish is a very colloquial version of english that borrows heavily from chinese and malay. the structure appears extremely rudimentary at times – lots of grammar is abandoned and articles are dropped often.

the vocabulary is very eclectic as well. spoken singlish can sound very jumbled and somewhat messy as everything seems shortened and sort of incomplete.

singlish english equivalent usage example(s)

lah/ah (a word that just adds emphasis) added to the end of sentences no lah!thank you ah!

ai-yo/ai-yoh expressing disappointment or sympathy typically used as a standalone expression, but sometimes used at the start of sentences person 1: my son tripped and cut himself yesterday.person 2: ai-yo! is he okay or not?

wah lao! no way! (some people may view this as offensive, so it is avoided in formal conversations) used as a standalone expression person 1: can you help me fill in this spreadsheet by tonight? the client needs it urgently.person 2: wah lao eh! i'm already busy with a lot of things to do, can you ask someone else to do it?

sia insane (a word that just adds emphasis) used at the end of sentences that guy is crazy sia!

makan eat used as a verb, just like its english counterpart you makan already?i go makan now ah.

bo jio did not invite used as a standalone expression person 1: i got a free drink from a shop yesterday.person 2: bo jio!

pai seh embarrassed/sorry (that i’m awkward) typically used as a standalone expression person 1: i bought a gift for you!person 2: pai seh! thank you very much ah!

ee-yer (a word used to express disgust) used as a standalone expression person 1: look at that guy digging his nose!person 2: ee-yer!

talk cock bullshit typically used in the middle of sentences don't talk cock lah!

shiok great typically used at the end of sentences yesterday's weather was damn shiok!

die die must try you have to give it a try typically used at the end of sentences, but sometimes used as a standalone expression the chicken rice stall at the hawker centre was super good! die die must try!

wah-seh expressing elation or jubilation (also can be expressing disappointment) typically used at the start of sentences, but sometimes used as a standalone expression

wah seh, i just managed to get indoors before the storm came.

when asking for help or directions, it should be noted that due to an influx of foreign workers and immigrants in recent years, there is a chance you might be asking somebody who has not been in singapore for all that long. in extreme cases, one might even encounter a person who barely speaks any english or is downright unfriendly. unfortunately it is difficult to determine at a glance who you should or should not ask for directions, but do not be afraid to try asking another person if the first answer you get is not satisfactory. a guaranteed way of finding someone willing to help would be to ask a teenager. as a result of compulsory english education, all teenagers speak english and will definitely be able to help. rest assured that most bona fide singaporeans would also be more than happy to help.

western television shows and films are shown in their original language with occasional subtitles into mandarin. news interviews in a different language are also subtitled into the main language of the channel/programme. television programmes and films that originate in other parts of asia however, are dubbed into the language of the channel they will be shown at. this especially applies to programmes and films originally in the hong kong cantonese language and taiwanese minnan language, in which case government policy mandates them to be dubbed into mandarin (english subtitles are shown during primetime hours).

see[edit]

map of central singapore, with outlines of detailed region maps

sights in singapore are covered in more detail under the various districts. broadly speaking:

beaches and tourist resorts: head to one of the three beaches on sentosa or its southern islands. other beaches can be found on the east coast.

culture and cuisine: see chinatown for chinese treats, little india for indian flavours, kampong glam (arab st) for a malay/arab experience or the east coast for delicious seafood, including the famous chilli and black pepper crab.

history and museums: the bras basah area east of orchard and north of the singapore river is singapore's colonial core, with historical buildings and museums. nus museum in the west is also very much worth the trip.

nature and wildlife: popular tourist attractions singapore zoo, night safari, jurong bird park and the botanical gardens are all in the north and west. finding "real" nature is a little harder, but the bukit timah nature reserve (located in the same district as the zoo) has more plant species than that in the whole of north america. pulau ubin, an island off the changi village in the east, is a flashback to the rural singapore of yesteryear. city parks full of locals jogging or doing tai chi can be found everywhere. also check out the tortoise and turtle sanctuary in the chinese gardens on the west side of town for a great afternoon with these wonderful creatures. $5 for adult admission and $2 for leafy vegetables and food pellets.

parks and gardens: the garden city and city in a garden [9] are new concepts being promoted by the singaporean government and singaporeans take great pride in their parks and gardens. be sure to visit the botanical gardens (including the national orchid garden) and the gardens by the bay (don't miss the flower dome and the cloud forest). there's also the hortpark at the "southern ridges" and the "chinese" and "japanese gardens".

skyscrapers and shopping: the heaviest shopping mall concentration is in orchard road, while skyscrapers are clustered around the singapore river, but also check out bugis and marina bay to see where singaporeans shop.

places of worship: don't miss this aspect of singapore, where buddhism, taoism, hinduism, sikhism, baha'i faith, christianity, islam and even judaism all exist in sizeable numbers. religious sites can be easily visited and welcome non-followers outside of service times. particularly worth visiting include: the vast kong meng san phor kark see monastery near ang mo kio, the colourful sri mariamman hindu temple in chinatown, the psychedelic burmese buddhist temple in balestier, one of the oldest hokkien temples thian hock keng temple and the stately masjid sultan in arab street.

itineraries[edit]

three days in singapore — a three-day sampler set of food, culture and shopping in singapore, easily divisible into bite-size chunks.

southern ridges walk — an easy scenic 9km stroll through the hills and jungles of southern singapore. highlights of the trail includes a 36 m high henderson waves pedestrian bridge providing a stunning view of the sea beyond the jungle.

henderson waves

travel tips[edit]

useful to carry:

deodorant/anti-perspirant - singapore is a humid country so expect to sweat a lot. sun glasses/sunscreen - singapore is usually bright and sunny. umbrella - there is some precipitation throughout the year. however, the rain does not last long (usually). shorts/half trousers - singapore is hot and humid. although air-conditioning is available in all public transport (except a few public buses) and almost all internal areas, it is advisable to carry some light clothing. do note that some places of worship may require visitors to dress conservatively. sweater - not necessary unless you are staying put in an air-conditioned place or if you are watching a movie in the cinema - the air-conditioner can get quite cold. mosquito repellent - in more remote areas there are mosquitos, otherwise they have been mostly eradicated from singapore. dengue fever is a particular problem in this part of the world, so be aware.

carry around with you a copy of the train network so you know how to get to places without having to go to the train station or look online. the train network is quite complicated and there can be a number of different routes to get to a place.

book a backpacker's place to stay if you do not want to pay exorbitant prices in hotels. singapore is notoriously expensive for hotel accommodation. backpacker options are affordable and clean.

do[edit]

while you can find a place to practice nearly any sport in singapore — golfing, surfing, scuba diving, even ice skating and snow skiing — due to the country's small size your options are rather limited and prices are relatively high. for water sports in particular, the busy shipping lanes and sheer population pressure mean that the sea around singapore is murky, and most locals head up to tioman (malaysia) or bintan (indonesia) instead. on the upside, there is an abundance of dive shops in singapore, and they often arrange weekend trips to good dive sites off the east coast of malaysia, so they are a good option for accessing some of malaysia's not-so touristy dive sites.

art[edit]

singapore may be a young country but it has a constantly evolving artistic landscape that draws its influences from its unique heritage of east and southeast asian culture, with a good mix of western touch.

the renaissance city project was initiated in 2000 by the singaporean government to establish singapore as a regional city of the arts to cultivate artistic interest and culture. today, singapore sees itself flourishing in the third phase of the renaissance city project with new museums, international galleries and art fairs entering the local artistic landscape.

singapore saw the opening of the artscience museum at the marina bay sands, a museum dedicated to design and technology. fourteen international galleries arrived at the shore of singapore housed at the gillman barracks, a new artistic area. the national art gallery is housed in two national monuments - the former supreme court building and city hall, is the largest visual arts institution in singapore and also one of the largest regionally, focusing on modern southeast asian art through its collections.

singapore's art district, located around the dhoby ghaut and city hall area have a concentration of art institutions, museums and galleries. notable museums and art venues include, the national museum of singapore, singapore art museum, the substation (singapore's first independent contemporary art centre) and art plural gallery, singapore's largest art gallery.

gambling[edit]

singapore has two integrated resorts with casinos. marina bay sands at marina bay is the larger and more popular of the two, while resorts world sentosa at sentosa aims for a more family-friendly experience (but offers no limit holdem from $5/$10). while locals (citizens and permanent residents) have to pay $100/day or $2,000/year to get in, foreign visitors can enter for free after presenting their passport. a driver license from your home country won't work. you must be 21+ to be in casino areas.

besides the casino, there are other forms of legalised betting which are more accessible to the locals. this includes horse racing, which is run by the singapore turf club[10] on weekends, as well as football (soccer) betting and several lotteries run by the singapore pools.

mahjong is also a popular pastime in singapore. the version played in singapore is similar to the cantonese version, but it also has extra "animal tiles" not present in the original cantonese version. however, this remains pretty much a family and friends affair, and there are no mahjong parlours.

golf[edit]

despite its small size, singapore has a surprisingly large number of golf courses, but most of the best ones are run by private clubs and open to members and their guests only. the main exceptions are the sentosa golf club, the famously challenging home of the barclays singapore open, and the marina bay golf course, the only 18-hole public course. see the singapore golf association for the full list; alternatively, head to the nearby indonesian islands of batam or bintan or up north to the malaysian town of malacca for cheaper rounds.

races[edit]

f1 singapore grand prix

the inaugural f1 singapore grand prix [11] was held at night in september 2008, and is a fixture on the local calendar. held on a street circuit in the heart of singapore and raced at night, all but race fans will probably wish to avoid this time, as hotel prices especially room with view of the f1 tracks are through the roof. tickets start from $150 but the thrilling experience of night race is definitely unforgettable for all f1 fans and photo buffs. besides being a uniquely night race, the carnival atmosphere and pop concert held around the race ground as well as the convenience of hotels and restaurants round the corner, distinguish the race from other f1 races held remotely away from urban centres.

the singapore turf club[12] in kranji hosts horse races most fridays, including a number of international cups, and is popular with local gamblers. the singapore polo club[13] near balestier is also open to the public on competition days.

spas[edit]

singapore has recently been experiencing a 'spa boom', and there is now plenty of choice for everything from holistic ayurveda to green tea hydrotherapy. however, prices aren't as rock-bottom as in neighbours indonesia and thailand, and you'll generally be looking at upwards of $50 even for a plain one-hour massage. premium spas can be found in most 5 star hotels and on orchard, and sentosa's spa botanica also has a good reputation. there are also numerous shops offering traditional chinese massage, which are mostly legitimate. the less legitimate "health centres" have been shut down. traditional asian-style public baths are non-existent.

when looking for beauty salons on orchard road, try out the ones on the fourth floor of lucky plaza. they offer most salon services like manicures, pedicures, facials, waxing and hair services. a favorite of flight crew and repeat tourists due to the lower costs as compared to the sky high prices of other salons along the shopping belt. shop around for prices, some of the better looking ones actually charge less.

when in the bugis or kampong glam walking belt, a good stop to rest weary feet would be at one of the many nail parlours in the area. manicures or pedicures are very affordable in singapore and most salons maintain a high level of hygiene. a few popular options in the area include manicurious, the nail artelier and the nail social.

some of the more popular, cost friendly massage includes chinatown’s own teochew meng reflexology centre which stands at people’s park complex.

swimming[edit]

forget your tiny hotel pool if you are into competitive or recreational swimming: singapore is paradise for swimmers with arguably the highest density of public pools in the world. they are all open-air 50m pools (some facilities even feature up to three 50m pools), accessible for an entrance fee of $1.00-1.50. some of the visitors don't swim at all. they just come from nearby housing complexes for a few hours to chill out, read and relax in the sun. most are open daily from 08:00-20:00, and all feature a small cafe. just imagine swimming your lanes in the tropical night with lit up palm trees surrounding the pool.

experience world class olympics-standard swimming pool at the ocbc aquatic centre near stadium mrt. it opens all day 07:00-22:00 unless they're hosting swimming championship. entrance is $2.60-2.90 and include access to training pool anytime of the day and competition pool at certain hours. check their website for lane availability.

activesg maintains a list of pools, most of which are part of a larger sports complex with gym, tennis courts etc, and are located near the mrt station they're named after. perhaps the best is in katong (111 wilkinson road, on the east coast): after the swim, stroll through the villa neighbourhood directly in front of the pool entrance and have at look at the luxurious, original architecture of the houses that really rich singaporeans live in. if you get bored with regular swimming pools, head to the jurong east swimming complex where you get the wave pool, water slides and jacuzzi at an insanely affordable entrance fee of $1.50 on weekdays and $2 on weekends.

for those who feel richer, visit the wild wild wet water theme park with $19 and get yourself wet with various exciting water slides and a powerful tidal wave pool.

for those who don't like pools, head out to the beaches. the east coast park has a scenic coastline that stretches over 15km. it's a popular getaway spot for singaporeans to swim, cycle, barbeque and engage in various other sports and activities. sentosa island also has three white, sandy beaches - siloso beach, palawan beach and tanjong beach - each with its own distinct characteristics, and also very popular with locals.

nature and wildlife[edit]

mandai[14] is a great location to experience several great parks such as jurong bird park, night safari and river safari. you can see animals in their natural environment and spend a peaceful day enjoying the nature.

water sports[edit]

canoeing and dragon-boating are popular water-sports in singapore, and there are many beautiful reservoirs and rivers where one can partake in such physical activity. check out the macritchie reservoir, kallang river and marina bay for reasonably priced options. besides these more regular water sports, singapore also offers water sports fans trendy activities such as cable-skiing and wave surfing in specially created environments.

snow sports[edit]

while obviously not the best place on earth for skiing, sunny singapore still has a permanent indoor snow centre — snow city offers visitors to the region a chance to experience winter. visitors can escape from the hot and humid tropical weather to play with snow or even learn to ski and snowboard with internationally certified professional instructors.

off the beaten track[edit]

there are several enjoyable things that not even many locals know about. do look up places like sungei buloh wetland reserve, old rail corridor, labrador park, istana woodneuk, etc. if you are in the mood of doing sport, consider the macritchie reservoir, featuring 11km of jungle running trails with monkeys, reptiles and turtles. if you're an avid fisherman, you can also try your hand at prawning, or prawn fishing. the sport of prawn fishing has grown tremendously in recent years across south east asia and can also be found in singapore. if you want a quick getaway from the city, you can also visit pulau ubin, an island northeast of mainland singapore that is accessible by bumboat from changi point ferry terminal. the island features vestiges of singapore’s old kampung (village) life, various wildlife, and has both cycling and walking trails, with bicycles widely available for rent upon arrival.

cooking classes[edit]

cookly the baking loft, 12 eu tong sen street #05-169 soho2@central singapore 059819, ☎ +6562212303 ([email protected]). this cooking class teaches the famous chicken rice and chili crab sauce with hands-on experience. they also teach ondeh ondeh, the famous dessert making of soft and chewy kueh using sweet potato filled with gula melaka and covered with desiccated coconut. s$77.

buy[edit]

all flower series coins and a $2 note.

the singaporean currency is the singapore dollar, symbolised sgd, s$ or just $ (as used throughout this guide), divided into 100 cents. there are coins of $0.05 (gold), $0.10 (silver), $0.20 (silver), $0.50 (silver) and $1 (gold), plus notes of $2 (purple), $5 (green), $10 (red), $50 (blue), $100 (orange), $1000 (purple) and $10000 (gold).

the brunei dollar is pegged at par with the singapore dollar and the two currencies can be used interchangeably in both countries, so don't be too surprised if you get a brunei note as change. you can safely assume that the '$' sign used in this island-nation refers to sgd unless it clearly states otherwise.

goods and services tax (gst), where applicable, is required by law to be included in the listed price of goods except for major hotels and some restaurants. you will know this as restaurants and hotels often display prices like $19.99++, where the "++" means that service charge (10%) and gst (8%) are not yet included in the listed price and will be added to your bill later (they are compunded so it is a whopping 18.8%!). when you see nett, it means it includes all taxes and service charges.

the gst portion is refundable only in the departure area of the main changi airport. the actual terms and documentation requirements are long and include a large fee and that you must remain outside of singapore for a full year. check here before the big splurge and allow time before your departure flight.

tipping is generally not practised in singapore, and is officially frowned upon by the government, although bellhops still expect $2 or so per bag. taxis will usually return your change to the last cent, or round in your favor if they can't be bothered to dig for change.

atms are ubiquitous in singapore and credit cards are widely accepted (although some shops may levy a 3% surcharge, and taxis a whopping 15%). travellers cheques are generally not accepted by retailers, but can be cashed at most exchange booths. ez-link and nets flash pay cards are accepted in some convenience stores and fast food chains. cash withdrawal with foreign cards could incur a fee with some atms. as of jan 2020, uob doesn't have a fee for foreign card cash withdrawals.

currency exchange booths can be found in every shopping mall and usually offer better rates, better opening hours and much faster service than banks. the huge 24 hr operation at mustafa in little india accepts almost any currency at very good rates, as do the fiercely competitive small shops at the aptly named change alley next to raffles place mrt. for large amounts, ask for a quote, as it will often get you a better rate than displayed on the board. rates at the airport are not as good as in the city, and while many department stores accept major foreign currencies, their rates are often terrible.

costs[edit]

singapore is famous for being moderately expensive by asian standards but affordable compared with some industrialized countries, with budget options and more luxurious options being easily available in singapore city. $10-$50 sgd is a perfectly serviceable daily backpacker budget if you are willing to cut some corners, though you may wish to double that for comfort. food in particular is a steal, with excellent hawker food available for between $1.5-$5 sgd for a generous serving. accommodation is a little pricier, but a bed in a hostel can cost as low as $10 sgd a night, an average 3-4 star hotel in the city centre would typically cost anywhere from $40-$300 per night for a basic room, and the most luxurious hotels on the island (except maybe the raffles) can be yours for $300 with the right discounts during the off-peak season. compare room prices in johor bahru, just across the border and consider seeing singapore from your base in johor. read wikitravel, johor bahru: by bus, there and back again, a day trip to singapore.

if you really want to go backpacking in singapore on a budget, then go couchsurfing. the locals are friendly with foreigners and would love to host a backpacker like yourself. budget travellers should note that singapore is much more expensive than the rest of southeast asia and should budget accordingly if planning to spend time in singapore. in general, prices in singapore are about twice as high as in malaysia and thailand and 3-5 times as high as in indonesia and the philippines.

if you’re still feeling a little budget conscious, try eating out once maybe twice a day and then cook your remaining meals at the lodge. groceries can be cheap at the local markets, but be wary of the convenience stores and supermarkets, which are usually more expensive. also free entertainment is also available at certain events and cultural centers.

expense broke backpacker frugal traveler creature of comfort

accommodation $10-$20 $20-$30 $40+

food $1.5-$14 $15-$30 $35+

transport $0-$5 $6-$10 $15+

nightlife delights $0-$10 $11-$25 $35+

activities $0-$14 $15-$25 $30+

total per day: $11.50-$63 $67-$120 $155+

haggling[edit]

except in off the beat markets, haggling is not common in singapore except in singapore/little india and singapore/chinatown, but this practice may be frowned upon in larger businesses in downtown. while at a smaller shack haggle away. however, keep in mind the guidelines for haggle. also, know that the employee working behind the counter is not in control of prices. he is only a low end sales associate being instructed on the lowest sales price the company offers and is only fulfilling the instructions of his boss. being mad at him for not giving you the price you want is not only rude and will close doors for you, but will not achieve anything as he can't make the final call on it. you can ask about discounts anywhere in singapore without issues.

shopping[edit]

cheated? ripped off by a shop? give the singapore tourism board's free hotline at ☎ 1800 736 2000.

for a better shopping experience, please see singapore tourism board's consumer advisory for more information.

the small claims tribunal at 1 havelock sq also has a special expedited process for tourists that can solve simple cases within 24 hours.

sim lim square, singapore's computing and electronics mecca

there are various shopping belts in singapore, marina bay, bugis street, chinatown, geylang serai, kampong gelam & arab street, little india, north bridge road, orchard road, and the suburbs. these all are very famous in singapore for shopping. shopping is second only to eating as a national pastime, which means that singapore has an abundance of shopping malls, and low taxes and tariffs on imports coupled with huge volume mean that prices are usually very competitive. while you won't find any bazaars with dirt-cheap local handicrafts (in fact, virtually everything sold in singapore is made elsewhere), goods are generally of reasonably good quality and shopkeepers are generally quite honest due to strong consumer protection laws. most shops are open 7 days a week from 10am-10pm, although smaller operations (particularly those outside shopping malls) close earlier — 7pm is common — and perhaps on sundays as well. mustafa in little india is open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. keep an eye out for the great singapore sale [15], usually held in june-july, when shopping centres pull out all stops to attract punters. many shops along orchard road and scotts road now offer late night shopping on the last friday of every month with over 250 retailers staying open till midnight.

antiques: the second floor of the tanglin shopping centre on orchard and the shops on south bridge rd in chinatown are good options if looking for the real thing (or high-quality reproductions).

books: borders at wheelock place has since closed down. however, kinokuniya is at ngee ann city, on orchard, is one of the largest bookshop in singapore. many second-hand bookshops are located in far east plaza and bras basah complex, where you may attempt to bargain if you are buying a lot. for university textbooks, the bookshops at the national university of singapore has the best prices on the island, up to 80% off compared to prices in the west.

cameras: peninsula plaza near city hall has singapore's best selection of camera shops. however, there are no great bargains to be had, and many camera shops in singapore (particularly those in lucky plaza and sim lim square) have a reputation for fleecing unwary tourists. the best way is to know what you are looking for and then when you arrive, drop by the shops at the airport's transit area and take a look at the price and check with them whether they have any promotions. then go to the city centre shops and compare prices/packages to see which shop will give you value for money. to be safe, always check prices and packages for everything you're interested in at large retailers like courts, harvey norman and best denki first. be very careful when shop staff attempt to promote brands or models other than the one you have in mind; a few shops at sim lim square and elsewhere are known to use this tactic and sell products at 2-4x their actual list prices.

clothes, high-street: ion, ngee ann city (takashimaya) and paragon on orchard have the heaviest concentration of branded boutiques. there are another malls such as raffles city located at city hall mrt that also hosts a variety of brands for instance, kate spade, timberland.

clothes, tailored: virtually all hotels have a tailor shop attached, and touting tailors are a bit of a nuisance in chinatown. as elsewhere, you'll get what you pay for and will get poor quality if you don't have the time for multiple fittings or the skill to check what you're getting. prices vary widely: a local shop using cheap fabrics can do a shirt for $40

clothes, youth: most of bugis is dedicated to the young, hip and cost-conscious. currently bugis street(opposite bugis mrt) is the most popular in the bugis area, consisting of 3 levels of shops. some spots of orchard, notably far east plaza not to be confused with far east shopping centre and the top floor of the heeren, also target the same market but prices are generally higher.

contemporary designs: the red dot design museum near chinatown a great place if you are into design, contemporary products and want to catch the latest trends. nearby places worth exploring include ann siang hill, duxton hill, club street and even along keong saik rd

computers: sim lim square (near little india) is great for the hardcore geek who really knows what they're after - parts pricelists are available on hardwarezone.com and are given out in sim lim itself, making price comparison easy. lesser mortals (namely, who have failed to do their price-checking homework) stand a risk of getting ripped off when purchasing, but this is generally not a problem with the price lists offered by most shops. some singaporeans purchase their electronic gadgets during the quarterly "it shows" usually held at suntec city convention centre or at the expo, at which prices on gadgets are sometimes slashed (but often only to sim lim levels). another possibility is to shop at funan it mall, the shops of which may be more honest on average (according to some). do not be attracted by side gifts/sweeteners of thumbdrives, mice and so on; these only tend to hide inflated prices.

consumer electronics: quite competitively priced in singapore. funan it mall (riverside), sim lim square and mustafa (little india) are good choices. avoid the tourist-oriented shops on orchard road, particularly the notorious lucky plaza, or risk getting ripped off. also be wary of shops on the 1st and 2nd levels of sim lim square, some of which tend to rip off tourists, so please do your research before heading down; multi-shop price comparisons and bargaining are absolutely essential. mustafa has fixed, low prices and is a good option. for any purchases, remember that singapore uses 230v voltage with a british-style three-pin plug.

electronic components: for do-it-yourself people and engineers, a wide variety of electronic components and associated tools can be found at sim lim tower (opposite sim lim square), near little india. you can find most common electronic components (such as breadboards, transistors, various ic's, etc.) and bargain for larger quantities as well. be careful as some of the shops in sim lim square are well known for their fleecing techniques.

ethnic knick-knacks: chinatown has singapore's heaviest concentration of glow-in-the-dark merlion soap dispensers and ethnic knick-knack, mostly but not entirely chinese and nearly all imported from somewhere else. for malay and indian stuff, the best places to shop are geylang serai and little india respectively.

fabrics: arab street and little india have a good selection of imported and local fabrics like batik. chinatown does sell rather reasonable and cheap fabrics, bargaining is allowed so do know your stuff on what fabric to buy. do note that fabrics in singapore may not be as cheap as overseas for most fabrics are imported to singapore, due to the freight charges and many middlemen, the fabric cost may be more costly than overseas.

fakes: unlike most south-east asian countries, pirated goods are not openly on sale and importing them to the city-state carries heavy fines. fake goods are nevertheless not difficult to find in little india, bugis, or even in the underpasses of orchard road.

food: local supermarkets cold storage, prime mart, shop 'n' save and ntuc fairprice are ubiquitous, but for specialties, jason's marketplace in the basement of raffles city and tanglin market place at tanglin mall (both on orchard) are some of singapore's best-stocked gourmet supermarkets, with a vast array of imported products. takashimaya's basement (orchard) has lots of small quirky shops and makes for a more interesting browse. for a more singaporean (and much cheaper) shopping experience, seek out any neighbourhood wet market, like little india's tekka market. for eating out, most shopping centres offer a range of small snack stands and eateries in their basements, as well as a food court or two.

games: video and pc games are widely available in singapore, and prices are usually cheaper than in the west. games sold for the local market are generally in english, and though some games imported from hong kong or taiwan would be in chinese. do note, however, that singapore's official region code is ntsc-j (together with japan, south korea, taiwan, hong kong etc.), which means that games sold may not be compatible with consoles in mainland china, north america, europe or australia. during the four times in a year it shows, pc, xbox, wii, playstation games prices may drop at such it shows, if not the games will be bundled with others (example: buy 2 at $49.90)

hi-fi stereos: the adelphi (riverside) has singapore's best selection of audiophile shops.

marine sports: many of the shophouses opposite the concourse on beach rd in bugis sell fishing and scuba diving gear.

mobile phones: very competitively priced in singapore due to high consumer volume, available throughout the country both used and new. phones are never sim locked, so they can be used anywhere, and many shops will allow you to "trade in" an older phone to offset the cost of a new one.

music: gramophone provides good prices on cds and has an interesting selection. numerous branches are scattered across the cbd and orchard road. one of the better gramophone locations is at ngee ann city in b2.

pretty in pink: peranakan tea set with dragon-phoenix motif

peranakan goods: the peranakan, or malay-chinese, may be fading but their colourful clothing and artwork, especially the distinctive pastel-coloured ceramics, are still widely available. antiques are expensive, but modern replicas are quite affordable. the largest selection and best prices can be found in katong on the east coast.

sports goods: queensway shopping centre, off alexandra rd and rather off the beaten track (take a taxi), seems to consist of nothing but sports goods shops. you can also find foreigner-sized sporty clothing and shoes here. do bargain! expect to get 40-50% off the price from the shops in orchard for the same items. velocity in novena is also devoted to sports goods, but is rather more upmarket. martial arts equipment is surprisingly hard to find, although most of the clothing shops around pagoda street in chinatown sell basic silk taiji/wushu uniforms. note that if you plan to buy weapons such as swords, you have to apply for a permit from the local police (around $10) to get your weaponry out of the country.

tea: chinatown's yue hwa (2nd floor) is unbeatable for both price and variety, but time for tea in lucky plaza (orchard) is also a good option. english tea is also widely available around orchard road, most notably at marks and spencer in centrepoint.

watches: high-end watches are very competitively priced. ngee ann city (orchard) has dedicated shops such as piaget and cartier, while millenia walk (marina bay) features the cortina watch espace selling 30 brands including audemars piguet & patek philippe, as well as several other standalone shops.

local souvenirs: even with her young age, singapore has a wide range of souvenirs available for tourists due to the rich multi-cultural history. while you can find merlion keychains, chocolates, t-shirts & postcards around chinatown & little india, there are plenty of unique souvenirs that are homegrown labels & represent singapore.

fashion label charles & keith (started out as shoe heaven), has got you covered if you're looking for a pair of perfect shoes & has evolved into handbags & accessories. grab the mini singapore sling cocktail set at raffles hotel and changi airport for the true heritage flavour. with their luxurious gold plating technology, risis provides beautiful gifts like gold-plated orchids and brooches.

one of the popular snack souvenirs - bak kwa from bee cheng hiang (smoked barbecue pork) is a well-loved snack especially popular during lunar new year. kaya is a savoury coconut milk, eggs, and sugar, usually spread on toast where locals consume for their breakfast. depending on the brand, it can taste rich & sweet to having a light pandan flavour. ya kun kaya is readily available in their nationwide outlets and changi airport.

for those who will miss singapore's rice dishes, you can get instant rice meals from yamie, where local favourites like chicken rice & briyani rice are pre-made, easy to prepare. a must-get, chilli crab & laksa sauce kits from prima taste are also saliva-inducing souvenirs available to purchase at supermarkets. these are halal.

bak kut teh (literally translated as meat bone tea) spices are also a fine choice to bring back a taste of singapore, and one can choose from ranges like a1 bak kut teh to celebrity-favourite outram park ya hua bak kut teh. speaking about tea, singapore also has her own luxury tea collection from twg which offers an impressive selection of over 800 teas, specially harvested from all around the world.

local designers like supermama have also came up with singaporean omiyage (contemporary giftware) ranging from procelain tableware to quirky socks. most of these souvenirs can be found in their own store outlets, changi airport or singapore souvenir curator - sg style, who does same-day delivery to your hotel.

for purchases of over $100 per day per participating shop, you may be able to get a 6% refund of your 7% gst at changi airport or seletar airport, but the process is a bit of a bureaucratic hassle. at the shop you need to ask for a tax refund cheque. before checking in at the airport, present this cheque together with the items purchased and your passport at the gst customs counter. get the receipt stamped there. then proceed with check-in and go through security. on the air side, bring the stamped cheque to the refund counter to cash it in or get the gst back on your credit card. see singapore customs [16] for the full scoop.

eat[edit]

this guide uses the following price ranges for a typical meal for one, including soft drink:

budget under $10

mid-range $10-30

splurge over $30

a plate of chilli crab

katong laksa, with chilli paste and chopped laksa leaf in a spoon

satay with peanut sauce, onions and cucumber

singapore is a melting pot of cuisines from around the world, and many singaporeans are obsessive gourmands who love to makan ("eat" in malay). you will find quality chinese, malay, indian, japanese, thai, italian, french, american and other food in this city-state.

eating habits run the gamut, but most foods are eaten by fork and spoon: push and cut with the fork in the left hand, and eat with the spoon in the right. noodles and chinese dishes typically come with chopsticks, while malay and indian food can be eaten by hand, but nobody will blink an eye if you ask for a fork and spoon instead. if eating by hand, always use your right hand to pick your food, as malays and indians traditionally use their left hand to handle dirty things. take note of the usual traditional chinese etiquette when using chopsticks, and most importantly, do not stick your chopsticks vertically into a bowl of rice. if eating in a group, serving dishes are always shared, but you'll get your own bowl of rice and soup. it's common to use your own chopsticks to pick up food from communal plates, but serving spoons can be provided on request.

keep an eye out for the singapore food festival [17], held every year in july. during the last three festivals, all visitors to singapore smart enough to ask for them at any tourist information desk received coupons for free chilli crab, no strings attached!

local delicacies[edit]

singapore is justly famous for its food, a unique mix of malay, chinese, indian and western elements. the following is only a brief sampler of the most popular dishes.

peranakan/nonya cuisine[edit]

culinary borrowings many regional terms and the odd euphemism tend to crop up in notionally english menus. a few of the more common ones:

assam tamarind (malay) bee hoon thin rice noodles (hokkien 米粉) garoupa grouper, a type of fish (portuguese) gonggong a type of conch (chinese) hor fun very wide, flat rice noodles (cantonese 河粉) kangkung water spinach, an aquatic vegetable (malay) kway teow flat rice noodles (hokkien 粿条) lengkuas blue ginger (malay) mee thick egg noodles (hokkien 面) serai lemon grass (malay) sotong squid/cuttlefish (malay) spare parts offal such as liver, heart, gizzard tang hoon glass vermicelli made from mung bean flour (hokkien 冬粉)

the most identifiable cuisine in the region is peranakan or nonya cuisine, born from the mixed malay and chinese communities of what were once the british colonies of the straits settlements (modern-day singapore, penang and malacca).

chilli crab is a whole crab ladled with oodles of sticky, tangy chilli sauce. it's spicy at first, but the more you eat, the better it gets. notoriously difficult to eat, so don't wear a white shirt: just dig in with your hands and ignore the mess. the seafood restaurants of the east coast are famous for this. be sure to get a side order of fried mantou (small sweet buns which have been deep fried for a crisp exterior) to mop up the sauce too. for a less messy but equally tasty alternative, ask for black pepper crab.

kaya is a jam-like spread made from egg and coconut, an odd-sounding but tasty combination. served on toast for breakfast, canonically accompanied by runny eggs and strong, sweet coffee (kopi). exists in two distinctive styles; the greenish nonya version, coloured with pandan leaf, and the brownish hainanese version.

laksa, in particular the katong laksa or laksa lemak style, is probably the best-known singaporean dish: white noodles in a creamy, immensely rich coconut-based curry broth, topped with cockles or shrimp. be warned that the common style found in hawker centres is often spicy, although you can ask for less/no chilli to dial down the heat. the katong style is much less spicy and is generally found only in katong itself (see the east coast page). singapore laksa is very different from penang laksa, which is a spicy, sourish, clear soup made with a tamarind-infused broth.

mee siam is rice flour noodles served in a sweet-sour soup (made from tamarind, dried shrimp and fermented beans), bean curd cubes, and hard boiled eggs. though the chinese, malays and indians all have their own versions, it is the peranakan version that is most popular with singaporeans. you will largely find this at malay stalls.

popiah, or spring rolls, come fresh or fried. they consist of a filling of boiled turnip, fried tofu, pork, shrimp with a slew of condiments, wrapped in a thin crepe smeared with sweet dark soy sauce and eaten like a fajita. they are related to the lumpia and runbing of other chinese communities in asia.

rojak means a mixture of everything in malay, and there are two very different types. chinese rojak is a salad of pineapple, white turnip, cucumber, tau pok (fried bean curd) with thin tiny slices of bunga kantan (torch ginger flower buds), tossed in shrimp paste sauce and sugar, then sprinkled with crushed peanuts. indian rojak consists of mainly fried fritters made from flour and various pulses with cucumber and tofu, with sweet & spicy sauces.

satay bee hoon is rice vermicelli (bee hoon) served with the same peanut and chilli sauce used for satay, hence the name. usually see hum (cockles), dried squid and pork slices are added.

ice cream is just as it is in western countries. however, in singapore, there are various local flavours such as durian and red bean which are not available outside the region and are certainly worth a try. to impress the locals, try asking for ice cream in roti (bread). besides these dishes, the peranakans are also known for their kueh or snacks, which are somewhat different from the malay versions due to stronger chinese influences.

malay cuisine[edit]

nasi lemak with sambal ikan bilis (fried anchovies with chilli paste), cucumber, chicken curry and an egg

the malays were singapore's original inhabitants and despite now being outnumbered by the chinese, their distinctive cuisine is popular to this day. characterized by heavy use of spices, most malay dishes are curries, stews or dips of one kind or another and nasi padang restaurants, offering a wide variety of these to ladle onto your rice, are very popular.

mee rebus is a dish of egg noodles with spicy, slightly sweet gravy, a slice of hard boiled egg and lime.

mee soto is malay-style chicken soup, with a clear broth, shredded chicken breast and egg noodles.

nasi lemak is the definitive malay breakfast, consisting at its simplest of rice cooked in light coconut milk, some ikan bilis (anchovies), peanuts, a slice of cucumber and a dab of chilli on the side. a larger ikan kuning (fried fish) or chicken wing are common accompaniments. more often than not, also combined with a variety of curries and/or sambal (see below). do notice that singaporean-style nasi lemak tends to serve sunny side-up eggs than hardboiled eggs, which are more common in malaysia.

otah/otak is a type of fish cake made of minced fish (usually mackerel), coconut milk, chilli and various other spices, and grilled in a banana or coconut leaf, usually served to accompany other dishes like nasi lemak.

rendang, occasionally dubbed "dry curry", is meat stewed for hours on end in a spicy (but rarely fiery) coconut-based curry paste until almost all water is absorbed. beef rendang is the most common, although chicken and mutton are spotted sometimes.

sambal is the generic term for chilli sauces of many kinds. sambal belacan is a common condiment made by mixing chilli with the shrimp paste belacan, while the popular dish sambal sotong consists of squid (sotong) cooked in red chilli sauce.

satay are barbecued skewers of meat, typically chicken, mutton or beef. what separates satay from your ordinary kebab is the spices used to season the meat and the slightly spicy peanut-based dipping sauce. the satay club at lau pa sat near raffles place is one popular location for this delicacy. malay desserts, especially the sweet pastries and jellies (kuih or kueh) made largely from coconut and palm sugar (gula melaka), bear a distinct resemblance to those of thailand. but in the sweltering tropical heat, try one of many concoctions made with ice instead:

bubur cha-cha consists of cubed yam, sweet potato and sago added into coconut milk soup. this can be served warm or cold.

chendol is made with green pea noodles, kidney beans, palm sugar and coconut milk.

durian is not exactly a dish, but a local fruit with distinctive odor you can smell a mile away and a sharp thorny husk. both smell and taste defy description. if you are game enough you should try it, but be warned beforehand — you will either love it or hate it. the rich creamy yellow flesh is often sold in places like geylang and bugis and elsewhere conveniently in pre-packaged packs, for anywhere from $1 for a small fruit all the way up to $24/kg depending on the season and type of durian. this 'king of fruits' is also made into ice cream, cakes, sweets, puddings and other decadent desserts. note: you're not allowed to carry durians on the mrt and buses and they're banned from many hotels.

ice kachang literally means "ice bean" in malay, a good clue to the two major ingredients: shaved ice and sweet red beans. however, more often than not you'll also get gula melaka (palm sugar), grass jelly, sweet corn, attap palm seeds and anything else on hand thrown in, and the whole thing is then drizzled with canned evaporated milk or coconut cream and coloured syrups. the end result tastes very interesting — and refreshing.

kuih (or kueh) refer to a plethora of steamed or baked "cakes", mostly made with coconut milk, grated coconut flesh, glutinous rice or tapioca. they are often very colourful and cut into fanciful shapes, but despite their wildly varying appearance tend to taste rather similar.

pisang goreng is a batter-dipped and deep-fried banana.

chinese cuisine[edit]

bak kut teh with rice and you tiao fritters

hainanese chicken rice

fried hokkien mee

prawn mee and pork rib soup

chinese food as eaten in singapore commonly originates from southern china, particularly fujian and guangdong. noodles can also be served not just in soup (湯 tang), but also "dry" (干 kan), meaning that your noodles will be served tossed with chilli and spices in one bowl, and the soup will come in a separate bowl.

bak chor mee（肉脞面）is essentially noodles with minced pork, tossed in a chilli-based sauce with lard, ikan bilis (fried anchovies), vegetables and mushrooms. black vinegar may also be added.

bak kut teh (肉骨茶), lit. "pork bone tea", is a simple-sounding soup of pork ribs simmered for hours in broth until they're ready to fall off the bone. singaporeans prefer the light and peppery teochew style ("white"), but a few shops offer the original dark and aromatic fujian kind ("black"). bak kut teh is typically eaten with white rice, mui choy (pickled vegetables) and a pot of strong chinese tea, hence the name — the broth itself doesn't contain any tea. to impress the locals, order some you tiao fritters from a nearby stall and cut them up into bite-sized chunks to dip into your soup. you may even choose to order an identical bowl of bak kut teh that your friend ordered and enjoy some fun bonding time with your peers over this widely loved singaporean dish.

char kway teow (炒粿条) is the quintessential singapore-style fried noodle dish, consisting of several types of noodles in thick brown sauce with strips of fishcake, chinese sausage, a token veggie or two and either cockles and shrimp. it's cheap ($2-3/serve), filling and has nothing to do with the dish known as "singapore fried noodles" elsewhere! (and which actually doesn't exist in singapore.)

chee cheong fun (豬腸粉) is a favorite breakfast consisting of lasagna-type rice noodles rolled up and various types of fried meats including fishballs and fried tofu. the dish is usually topped with a generous amount of sauce.

chwee kway （水粿） is a breakfast dish consisting of rice cakes topped with chai po (salted fermented turnips), usually served with some chilli sauce.

fishball noodles　(魚丸面) come in many forms, but the noodle variety most often seen is mee pok, which are flat egg noodles. the noodles are tossed in chilli sauce and accompanied by a side bowl of fishballs in soup.

hainanese chicken rice (海南鸡饭) is steamed ("white") or roasted ("red") chicken flavoured with soy sauce and sesame oil served on a bed of fragrant rice that has been cooked in chicken broth and flavoured with ginger and garlic. often accompanied by chilli sauce made from crushed fresh chillis, ginger, garlic and thick dark soy sauce as well as some cucumber and a small bowl of chicken broth.

hokkien mee (福建面) is a style of soupy fried noodles in light, fragrant stock with prawns and other seafood. oddly, it bears little resemblance to the kuala lumpur dish of the same name, which uses thick noodles in dark soy, or even the penang version, which is served in very spicy soup.

kway chap (粿汁) is essentially sheets made of rice flour served in a brown stock, accompanied by a plate of braised pork and pig organs (tongue, ear and intestines).

prawn noodles (虾面, hae mee in hokkien) is an dark-brown prawn broth served with egg noodles and a giant tiger prawn or two on top. some stalls serve it with boiled pork ribs as well. the best versions are highly addictive and will leave you slurping up the last msg-laden (probably from the shrimp heads) drops.

steamboat (火锅), also known as hot pot, is do-it-yourself soup chinese style. you get a pot of broth bubbling on a tabletop burner, pick meat, fish and veggies to your liking from a menu or buffet table, then cook it to your liking. when finished, add in noodles or ask for rice to fill you up. this usually requires a minimum of two people, and the more the merrier.

tau huay (豆花) is probably the most common traditional chinese dessert, a bowl of tofu curds in syrup, served either hot or cold. a recent innovation that has swept the island is a delicious custard-like version ("soft tau huay") which includes no syrup and is extremely soft despite being solid.

wonton mee (云吞面) is thin noodles topped with wantan dumplings of seasoned minced pork. unlike the soupy hong kong version, it is usually served 'dry' in soy sauce and chilli.

yong tau foo (酿豆腐) literally means "fermented tofu", but it's more exciting than it sounds. the diner selects their favorites from a vast assortment of tofu, fish paste, assorted seafood and vegetables, and they are then sliced into bite-size pieces, cooked briefly in boiling water and then served either in broth as soup or "dry" with the broth in a separate bowl. the dish can be eaten by itself or with any choice of noodles. essential accompaniments are spicy chili sauce and sweet sauce for dipping.

indian cuisine[edit]

roti prata (left) and roti telur (centre) with a side order of chicken curry

the smallest of the area's big three ethnic groups, the indians have had proportionally the smallest impact on the local culinary scene, but there is no shortage of indian food even at many hawker centres. delicious and authentic indian food can be had at little india, including south indian typical meals such as dosa (thosai) crepes, idli lentil-rice cakes and sambar soup, as well as north indian meals including various curries, naan bread, tandoori chicken and more. in addition, however, a number of indian dishes have been "singaporeanized" and adopted by the entire population, including:

chicken tikka masala is, true to the name, a gigantic barbequed grilled chicken cooked in a spicy onions and tomatoes gravy sauce. singapore's little india is the place to sample this. note that there are two distinct styles, the fiery indian and the milder chinese kind. chicken tikka masala is the most popular north indian dish and khansama tandoori restaurant located at 166 serangoon road is the best place to have it.

tandoori chicken is, true to the name, a gigantic charcoal oven barbequed chicken. singapore's little india is the place to sample this. note that there are two distinct styles, the fiery indian and the milder chinese kind. tandoori chicken is the most popular north indian starter ( finger food ) and khansama tandoori restaurant located at 166 serangoon road is the best place to have it.

indian chaat is the traditional indian street snack. singapore's little india is the place to sample this. nindian chaat is the most popular north indian street food ( finger food ) and khansama tandoori restaurant located at 166 serangoon road is the best place to have it.

fish head curry is, true to the name, a gigantic curried fish head cooked whole until it's ready to fall apart. singapore's little india is the place to sample this. note that there are two distinct styles, the fiery indian and the milder chinese kind.

nasi briyani is rice cooked in turmeric, giving it an orange colour. unlike the hyderabadi original, it's usually rather bland, although specialist shops do turn out more flavorful versions. it is usually served with curry chicken and some indian crackers.

roti prata is the local version of paratha, flat bread tossed in the air like pizza, rapidly cooked in oil, and eaten dipped in curry. modern-day variations can incorporate unorthodox ingredients like cheese, chocolate, sugar and even ice cream, but some canonical versions include roti kosong (plain), roti telur (with egg) and murtabak (layered with chicken, mutton or fish). strict vegetarians beware: unlike indian roti, roti prata batter is usually made with eggs.

murtabak is a variety of roti prata where mutton, chicken, onion and sometimes peas, depending on the stall, are added into a typical "prata", and served with a curry of your choice. most stalls has chicken and fish curry and they will serve you either of those two randomly unless specified. do take note that the curry served are just plain curry without and meat included. fish curry is generally the more commonly served and carries a slight sour taste. a murtabak is generally much larger than a typical roti kosong and it is recommended that it is shared among at least two person. zam zam located at the kampong glam bugis area is arguably the most famous restaurant in singapore serving the murtabak

putu mayam is a sweet dessert composed of vermicelli-like noodles topped with shredded coconut and orange sugar.

hawker centres[edit]

social welfare singapore style one thing notably absent from singaporean hawker centres and food courts is any form of napkins or tissues. the solution to the mystery is in singapore's lack of government welfare: instead, every hawker centre has a resident invalid or two, who make a living by selling tissues ($1 for a few packets). these folks believe in self reliance instead of depending on government welfare funds. do give them your respectful support.

typical hawker centre, bugis

the cheapest and most popular places to eat in singapore are hawker centres, essentially former pushcart vendors directed into giant complexes by government fiat. prices are low ($1.50-$5 for most dishes), hygiene standards are high (every stall is required to prominently display a health certificate grading it from a to d) and the food can be excellent — if you see a queue, join it! the lack of air-conditioning may seem somewhat unbearable to foreigners, but a visit to a hawker centre remains a must when in singapore. however, be leery of overzealous pushers-cum-salesmen, especially at the satay club in lau pa sat and newton food centre at newton circus: the tastiest stalls don't need high-pressure tactics to find customers. touting for business is illegal, and occasionally a reminder of this can result in people backing off a bit.

to order, first chope (reserve) a table by either parking a friend by the table or, in the more singaporean way, dumping a pack of tissue onto the tabletop. note the table's number, then place your order at your stall of choice. some stalls will deliver to your table, in which case you pay when you get your food. however, note that some stalls (particularly very popular ones) have signs stating "self-service", meaning that you're expected to get your food yourself and you pay on order. although, if it is quiet and you are sitting nearby, they will usually deliver anyway. at almost every stall you can also opt to take away (called "packet" or ta pao (打包) in cantonese), in which case employees pack up your order in a plastic box/bag and even throw in disposable utensils. once you are finished, look around: if there are signs asking you to return your tray, take your dishes to the tray return station (usually clearly marked). this is part of a government initiative that has been pushed out in recent years encouraging diners to return their own plates so as to reduce the burden on the cleaners. if there are no signs, you can leave your dishes on your table, where a cleaner will come by to pick them up.

every district in singapore has its own hawker centres and prices decrease as you move out into the boondocks. for tourists, centrally located newton circus (newton mrt), gluttons bay and lau pa sat (near the river), are the most popular options — but this does not make them the cheapest or the tastiest, and the demanding gourmand would do well to head to chinatown or the heartlands instead. many of the best food stalls are located in residential districts away from the tourist trail and do not advertise in the media, so the best way to find them is to ask locals for their recommendations. a good example is the old airport road food centre in a residential area near dakota mrt station (about a $10-$15 taxi ride from town) which rarely has many tourists and is a true hawker centre for locals. and if you miss western food, botak jones [18] in several hawker centres offers reasonably authentic and generously sized american-restaurant style meals at hawker prices.

coffee shops[edit]

coffee, see, and tea, oh! coffee and tea in hawker centres and kopitiam goes for under a dollar a cup, a steep discount on starbucks prices, but you'll need to learn the lingo to get what you want. if you order just kopi (the malay word for "coffee") or teh (hokkien for "tea") in singapore, it will definitely be served with a heaped spoonful of sugar, and more often than not with a squirt of sweet condensed milk. to reduce the amount of sugar slightly, use the term siew dai. ("less sweet") kopi-c or teh-c substitutes unsweetened evaporated milk, while kopi-o or teh-o makes sure it's served with no milk. to get rid of the sugar, you need to ask for it kosong ("plain"), so if you want a plain black cup of joe, you need to ask for kopi-o kosong! if you want your drink cold, just add a peng to the end of the drink name, eg. kopi-o-peng, teh-peng, teh-c-peng, milo-peng etc. and it will be served with ice. the drinks sold at such places are generally around $1.

despite the name, coffee shops or kopitiam sell much more than coffee — they are effectively mini-hawker centres with perhaps only half a dozen stalls (one of which will, however, sell coffee and other drinks). the singaporean equivalent of pubs, this is where folks come for the canonical singaporean breakfast of kopi (strong, sugary coffee), some kaya (egg-coconut jam) toast and runny eggs, and this is also where they come to down a beer or two and chat away in the evenings. english proficiency can somtimes be limited, but most stall owners know enough to communicate the basics, and even if they don't, nearby locals will usually help you out if you ask. many coffee shops offer tze char (煮炒) for dinner, meaning a menu of local dishes, mostly chinese-style seafood, served at your table at mid-range prices.

the usual international coffee chains such as starbucks and the coffee bean & tea leaf can be found in many shopping malls where an iced coffee or tea can set you back $5 and up. more discerning coffee drinkers may consider visiting the local cafes that serve coffee brewed with greater skill and care than these international coffee chains.

food courts[edit]

retro style at the food republic food court, orchard

found in the basement or top floor of nearly every shopping mall, food courts are the gentrified, air-conditioned version of hawker centres. the variety of food on offer is almost identical, but prices are on average $1-3 higher than prices in hawker centres and coffee shops (depending on the area, it is slightly more expensive in tourist intensive areas). the quality of food is good but not necessarily value for money.

fast food[edit]

international fast food chains like mcdonald's, carl's jr., burger king, kfc, mos burger, dairy queen, orange julius, subway etc are commonly found in various shopping malls. prices range from $2 for a basic burger and $5 upwards for a set meal. such restaurants are self-service and clearing your table after your meal is strongly recommended. in addition to the usual suspects, look out for these uniquely singaporean brands:

artease cafe, [x]. this home-grown brand offers a variety of premium tea and toppings in interesting flavours. they also serve great coffee. bengawan solo, [x]. singapore version of indonesian cakes, chinese pastries and everything in between. the name is taken from the name of a famous river in java. breadtalk, [x]. this self-proclaimed "designer bread" chain has taken not just singapore but much of south-east asia by storm. everything is jazzily shaped, funkily named (eg. crouching tiger, hidden bacon) and baked on premises. just note that, to the western palate, almost everything is rather sweet. jollibean, [x]. fresh soy drinks, beancurd and tasty mee chiang kueh chinese pancakes. killiney kopitiam, [x]. serves kaya toast, kopi and ginger tea (with ice or without); waiters at the original somerset location shout your order towards the back with gusto. mr bean, [x]. offers a variety of soya bean drinks, ice-creams and pastries snacks. old chang kee, [x]. famous for their curry puffs, but their range now covers anything and everything deep-fried. take-away only. ya kun kaya toast, [x]. serves the classic singaporean breakfast all day long: kaya toast, runny eggs and strong, sweet coffee (plus some other drinks). arguably one of the more successful chains with branches in as far as south korea and japan.

restaurants[edit]

kee-ping up with the lims ever wonder why every other chinese hawker stall and restaurant in singapore has a name that ends in kee? the answer is simple: the character kee (记) is chinese for "brand" or "mark", and is used much like the trademark symbol in the west. a name like yan kee thus means "run by the yan family", and should not be taken as a political statement!

singapore offers a wide variety of full-service restaurants as well, catering to every taste and budget.

as the majority of singapore's population is ethnic chinese, there is an abundance of chinese restaurants in singapore, mainly serving southern chinese (mostly hokkien, teochew or cantonese) cuisines, though with the large number of expatriates and foreign workers from china these days, cuisine originating from shanghai and further north is also not hard to find. as with chinese restaurants anywhere, food is eaten with chopsticks and served with chinese tea. depending on where you go and what you order, prices can vary greatly. in ordinary restaurants, prices usually start from $20-30 per person, while in top end restaurants in five-star hotels, prices can go as high as more than $300 per person if you order delicacies such as abalone, suckling pig and lobster.

being a maritime city, one common specialty is seafood restaurants, offering chinese-influenced singaporean classics like chilli crabs. these are much more fun to go to in a group, but be careful what you order: gourmet items like sri lankan giant crab or shark's fin can easily push your bill up to hundreds of dollars. menus typically say "market price", and if you ask they'll quote you the price per 100 g, but a big crab can easily top 2 kilos. the best-known seafood spots are clustered on the east coast, but for ambience the riverside restaurants at boat quay and clarke quay can't be beat.

singapore also has its share of good western restaurants, with british and american influenced food being a clear favourite among locals. most of the more affordable chains are concentrated around orchard road and prices start from around $10-20 per person for the main course. french, italian, japanese and korean food is also readily available, though prices tend to be on the expensive side, while thai and indonesian restaurants tend to be more affordable.

one british import much beloved by singaporeans is high tea. in the classical form, as served up by finer hotels across the island, this is a light afternoon meal consisting of tea and a wide array of british-style savoury snacks and sweet pastries like finger sandwiches and scones. however, the term is increasingly used for afternoon buffets of any kind, and chinese dim sum and various singaporean dishes are common additions. prices vary, but you'll usually be looking at $20-30 per head. note that many restaurants only serve high tea on weekends, and hours may be very limited: the famous spread at the raffles hotel's tiffin room, for example, is only available between 3:30pm-5pm.

singaporeans are big on buffets, especially international buffets offering a wide variety of dishes including western, chinese and japanese as well as some local dishes at a fixed price. popular chains include sakura [19], pariss [20], vienna [21] and todai [22].

most hotels also offer lunch and dinner buffets. champagne brunches on sundays are particularly popular, but you can expect to pay over $100 per head and popular spots, like mezza9 at the hyatt on orchard, will require reservations.

unlike most other shops, restaurants in singapore usually do not include the additional charges (7% gst and 10% service charge) in their list prices. price lists displayed outside restaurants and menus typically indicate this fact with a statement such as "prices do not include gst and service charge", or indicate their prices with "++", e.g., $19.90++.

fine dining[edit]

the opening of the two casinos has led to several of the world's top chefs opening local branches of their restaurant at the integrated resorts. celebrity restaurants that have set up shop at marina bay sands include waku ghin, spago and long chim. prices are generally what you would expect for eating at a fine dining restaurant.

supper clubs[edit]

pop up dining options or supper clubs are normally dinner events hosted by local chefs. while a relatively new concept in singapore, it is gaining popularity with more and more local chefs opening up their homes to guests. authentic food and dining in the company of new friends is a new trend that is catching up in singapore. bonappetour is a great place to discover such dining options.

dietary restrictions[edit]

singapore is an easy place to eat for almost everybody. many indians and a few chinese buddhists are strictly vegetarian, so indian stalls may have a number of veggie options and some hawker centres will have a chinese vegetarian stall or two, often serving up amazing meat imitations made from gluten. chinese vegetarian food traditionally does not use eggs or dairy products and is thus almost always vegan; indian vegetarian food, however, often employs cheese and other milk products. be on your guard in ordinary chinese restaurants though, as even dishes that appear vegetarian on the menu may contain seafood products such as oyster sauce or salted fish — check with the waiter if in doubt. some restaurants can be found that use "no garlic, no onions".

muslims should look out for halal certificates issued by muis, the islamic religious council of singapore or 100% muslim-owned certificates. travellers looking for halal food can check at here or here for halal food. many western fast-food chains in singapore are certified halal. check for the halal certificates which will be prominently shown at the door or behind the counter. as singapore is a multi-cultural country, you would be able to find many halal malay, indian, chinese, japanese, korean, thai and western cuisines.

jews, on the other hand, will have a harder time as kosher food is nearly unknown in singapore. nevertheless, kosher food is still available near singapore's two synagogues at oxley rise and waterloo street in the central business district; check with the jewish welfare board [23] for details.

celiac disease is relatively unheard of in singapore, so don't expect to find information on menus about whether dishes contain gluten or not. a few exceptions to this include cedele [24] and barracks @ house [25].

drink[edit]

clarke quay by night

singapore's nightlife has both increased in vibrancy and variety over the years. some clubs have 24 hr licenses and few places close before 3am. any artist touring asia are pretty much guaranteed to stop in singapore, with superclub zouk in particular regularly clocking high on lists of the world's best nightclubs. other than that visiting clarke quay is one of the best things to do in singapore and experience nightlife of this vibrant city. singapore's nightlife is largely concentrated along the three quays — boat, clarke and robertson — of the riverside, with the clubs of sentosa and nearby st james power station giving party animals even more reason to dance the night away. gay bars are mostly found around chinatown. drinking age is 18, and while this is surprisingly loosely enforced, some clubs have higher age limits.

friday is generally the biggest night of the week for going out, with saturday a close second. sunday is gay night in many bars and clubs, while wednesday or thursday is ladies' night, often meaning not just free entrance but free drinks for women. most clubs are closed on monday and tuesday, while bars generally stay open but tend to be very quiet.

for a night out singapore style, gather a group of friends and head for the nearest karaoke box — major chains include k-box [26] and party world. room rental ranges from $30/hour and up. beware that the non-chain, glitzy (or dodgy) looking, neon-covered ktv lounges may charge much higher rates and the short-skirted hostesses may offer more services than just pouring your drinks. in singapore, the pronunciation of karaoke follows the japanese "karah-oh-kay" instead of the english "carry-oh-key".

alcohol[edit]

reddot brewhouse premium craft beers

the original singapore sling at the raffles

alcohol is widely available but very expensive due to singapore's heavy sin taxes. you can bring in up to one litre of liquor and two litres of wine and beer if you arrive from countries other than malaysia. changi airport has a good range of duty free spirits at reasonable prices, but cheap wine is non-existent, with bottles starting well over s$20. careful shopping at major supermarkets will also throw up common basic australian wine labels for under $20.

alcohol is haram (forbidden) to muslims, and most muslim singaporeans duly avoid it. while most non-muslim singaporeans are not puritanical and enjoy a drink every now and then, do not expect to find the binge-drinking culture that you will find in most western countries. unlike in most western countries, public drunkenness in socially frowned upon in singapore, and misbehaving yourself under the influence of alcohol will certainly not gain you any respect from singaporean friends. do not allow any confrontations to escalate into fights, as the police will be called in, and you will face jail time and possibly caning.

prices when eating out vary. you can enjoy a large bottle of beer of your choice at a coffee shop or hawker centre for less than $6 (and the local colour comes thrown in for free). on the other hand, drinks in any bar, club or fancy restaurant remain extortionate, with a basic drink clocking in at $10-15 while fancy cocktails would usually be in the $15-25 range. on the upside, happy hours and two-for-one promotions are common, and the entry price for clubs usually includes several drink tickets. almost all restaurants in singapore allow bringing your own (byo) wine and cheaper restaurants without a wine menu usually don't even charge corkage, although in these places you'll need to bring your own bottle opener and glasses. fancier places charge $20-50, although many offer free corkage days on monday or tuesday.

tourists flock to the long bar in the raffles hotel to sample the original singapore sling, a sickly sweet pink mix of pineapple juice, gin and more, but locals (almost) never touch the stuff. the tipple of choice in singapore is the local beer, tiger, a rather ordinary lager, but there's been a recent microbrewery trend with singapore's very own reddot brewhouse (dempsey & boat quay), archipelago, brewerkz (riverside point, singapore indoor stadium, orchard parade hotel, and sentosa boardwalk), paulaner brauhaus (millenia walk) and pump room (clarke quay) all offering interesting alternatives.

there are also many online alcohol stores that offer great value and convenience with doorstep delivery such as cellarbration singapore, alcohol delivery, winelah and cornerstonewines for you to shop from if you are looking for an affordable nightcap or as a gift for your host in singapore.

tobacco[edit]

tobacco is heavily taxed, and you are not allowed to bring more than one opened pack (not carton, but a single pack!) of cigarettes into the country. this is particularly strictly enforced on the land borders with malaysia. many public places including hawker centres have restrictions on smoking, and it is prohibited in public transport as well. there is a total ban on smoking in all air-conditioned places (including pubs and discos), and strict limitations on where you can smoke outside as well (e.g., bus stops, parks, playgrounds and all except the designated sections of hawker centres are off limits). the designated zone should be marked with a yellow outline, and may have a sign reading "smoking zone".

prostitution[edit]

prostitution is tolerated in six designated districts, most notably geylang, which — not coincidentally — also offers some of the cheapest lodging and best food in the city. the industry maintains a low profile (no go-go bars here) and is not a tourist attraction by any stretch of the word. legally practising commercial sex workers are required to register with the authorities and attend special clinics for regular sexually transmitted disease screening. however, please be prudent and practice safe sex--although most sex workers will insist on it anyway.

orchard towers, on orchard road, has been famously summarized as "four floors of whores" and, despite occasional crackdowns by the authorities, continues to live up to its name. beware that the prostitutes working here are usually not registered, so the risk of theft and stds is significantly higher. some transgender women work at this establishment because the state does not allow them to obtain a license for sex work. because they are considered illegal workers, they are subjected to constant raids, harassment, intimidation, imprisonment and other forms of degrading treatment and criminalization.the singapore police force combats this by having detectives posing as prostitues so beware that you may set yourself for a sting. [27]

sleep[edit]

individual listings can be found in singapore's district articles accommodation in singapore is expensive by south-east asian standards. particularly in the higher price brackets, demand has been outstripping supply recently and during big events like the f1 race or some of the larger conventions it's not uncommon for pretty much everything to sell out. lower-end hotels and hostels, though, remain affordable and available throughout the year.

this guide uses the following price ranges for a standard double room:

budget under $100

mid-range $100-300

splurge over $300

singapore's laws that ban late night/early morning construction only apply to residential areas, noise sensitve places and not the city centre. you can expect to hear loud piling from sites such as the new downtown mrt line tunnels late into the night or early morning. keep this in mind and check for any construction work near any hotel you choose as the work will be unlikely to stop when you want to sleep!

unless you're a shopping maven intent on maximizing time in orchard road's shopping malls, the riverside is probably the best place to stay in singapore.

budget[edit]

backpackers' hostels can be found primarily in little india, chinatown, bugis, clarke quay and the east coast at about $25-40 for a dorm bed.

cheap hotels are clustered in the geylang, balestier and little india districts, where they service mostly the type of customer who rents rooms by the hour. rooms are generally small and not fancy, but are still clean and provide basic facilities like a bathroom and television. prices start as low as $15 for a "transit" of a few hours and $40 for a full night's stay. a good number of these value for money hotels conveniently linked by local transport are on balestier road. some of these hotels along balestier road are love hotels whose prices skyrocket friday thru sunday. read the costs section above for additional money saving tips.

mid-range[edit]

much of singapore's mid-range accommodation is in rather featureless but functional older hotels, with a notable cluster near the western end of the singapore river. accommodations close to the iconic singapore river include the recently refurbished holiday inn® singapore atrium. there has, however, been a recent surge of "boutique" hotels in renovated shophouses here and in chinatown and these can be pretty good value, with rates starting from $100/night.

splurge[edit]

raffles hotel

singapore has a wide selection of luxury accommodation, including the famed raffles hotel. you will generally be looking at upwards of $300 per night for a room in a five-star hotel, which is still a pretty good deal by most standards. hotel rates fluctuate quite a bit: a large conference can double prices, while on weekends in the off-peak season heavy discounts are often available. the largest hotel clusters can be found at marina bay (good for sightseeing) and around orchard road (good for shopping).

dusit thani laguna singapore, 11 laguna golf green, singapore 488047, ☎ 65 6841 8888 (fax: [email protected]), [x]. checkin: 15:00; checkout: 12:00. dusit thani laguna singapore is nestled among stunning landscapes, offering premium amenities with world-class facilities, all while being enriched with unique thai hospitality. located just a 10-minute drive from changi international airport, the hotel is also conveniently situated only 15 minutes from the city center. sgd380 – sgd750 (excluding suite price). sgd380 – sgd2500 (incl. suite).

long-term[edit]

housing in singapore is expensive, as the high population density and sheer scarcity of land drives real estate prices through the roof. as a result, you would generally be looking at rentals on par with the likes of new york and london.

apartment hotels in singapore have prices competitive with hotels but are quite expensive compared to apartments.

renting an apartment in singapore will generally require a working visa. while over 80% of singaporeans live in government-subsidized housing development board (hdb) flats, their availability to visitors is limited, although jtc's shift [28] scheme makes some available with monthly rents in the $1700-2,800 range.

most expats, however, turn to private housing blocks known as condos, where an average three-bedroom apartment will cost you anything from $3,200 per month for an older apartment in the suburbs to $20,000 for a top-of-the-line deluxe one on orchard road. most condos have facilities like pools, gyms, tennis court, car park and 24 hr security. as the supply of studio and one-bedroom apartments is very limited, most people on a budget share an apartment with friends or colleagues, or just sublet a single room. landed houses, known as bungalows, are incredibly expensive in the centre (rents are regularly measured in tens of thousands) but can drop if you're willing to head out into the woods — and remember that you can drive across the country in 30 minutes.

one or two-month security deposits are standard practice and for monthly rents of under $3,000 you need to pay the agent a commission of 2 weeks rent per year of the lease arranged. leases are usually for two years, with a "diplomatic clause" that allows you to terminate after 1 year. singapore expats [29] is the largest real estate agency geared for expatriates and their free classified ads are a popular choice for hunting for rooms or apartment-mates. you might also want to check the classified ads in the local newspapers.

learn[edit]

singapore's universities are generally well-regarded and draw exchange students from near and far.

national university of singapore (nus), [x]. singapore's oldest university, strong in law, computing and science. one of the premier universities in asia. nanyang technological university (ntu), [x]. the second university in this island state, more geared towards engineering, media and business studies. host for the youth olympics 2010 singapore management university (smu), [x]. the third, newest, and the only publicly-funded private university in singapore. geared towards finance and business. singapore university of technology and design (sutd), [x]. singapore's fourth public university, established in collaboration with massachusetts institute of technology in the us to advance knowledge and nurture technically grounded leaders and innovators to serve societal needs. yale-nus college, [x]. an autonomous and renowned liberal arts college, one of the first of its kind in asia, born from a partnership between yale university and national university of singapore. singapore institute of technology (sit), [x]. singapore's fifth public university, the university primarily caters to local polytechnic graduates who desire to pursue a bachelor's degree singapore institute of management university (sim), [x]. singapore's private university with a number of international degree courses. the school offers a wide range of first degrees, from the arts to business to technology studies.

a number of foreign universities, business schools and specialised institutes have also setup their asian campuses in singapore.

james cook university's singapore campus (jcu singapore), [x]. jcu singapore is a branch of james cook university, based in townsville, australia, ranked in the top 4% of universities in the world (arwu ranking) and is the leading tropical research university in australia. . jcu singapore offers pathway, business, education, counselling, psychology, environmental science, information technology, tourism & hospitality courses. jcu singapore runs on a trimester system, allowing students to 'fast track' their study and complete their degrees in a shorter period of time than other universities in the region. sp jain centre of management (spjcm), [x]. international campus of the business school in mumbai. insead, [x]. the asian campus of european business school, insead. university of chicago graduate school of business, [x]. the asian campus of the university of chicago graduate school of business, offering one of the most expensive mbas in the world. digipen institute of technology, [x]. the asian campus of the digipen institute of technology, redmond, seattle, washington. university of nevada - las vegas - singapore campus, [x]. the singapore campus of the university of nevada - las vegas. offering bachelor of science degrees in hospitality management. essec, [x]. international campus of the business school in paris. tisch asia, [x]. asian campus of new york university's tisch school of the arts. it offers courses that are film-related, including animation, writing and producing.

cooking[edit]

food playground, 24a sago street (300m from chinatown mrt), ☎ +65 9452 3669 ([email protected]), [x]. 09:30-12:30. if you are looking beyond the usual sightseeing attractions, their hands-on cultural cooking classes will help you dive deep into the fascinating side of singapore’s food heritage and culture. their friendly local instructors will teach you how to whip up popular singaporean dishes like nyonya laksa, chicken rice or satay in an informal and fun atmosphere. you will also get to eat and enjoy your own creations and mingle with your newfound friends at their dining room inside a restored pre-war shophouse. scheduled classes run mondays through fridays and each class has a duration of 3 hours. all skill levels are welcome and they also cater for different dietary requirements and specific needs. rated no.1 activity in singapore on tripadvisor. 12 students maximum per class. from $99 per person. at-sunrice globalchef academy, 28 tai seng street, level 5, ☎ +65 6416 6688 ([email protected]), [x]. established in 2001, at-sunrice globalchef academy is the first culinary academy in singapore to be awarded the national cet institution (nci) accreditation and in 2011, at-sunrice opened a new workforce skill qualification (wsq) integrated f&b academy located in 28 tai seng street.the academy offers nationally recognised wsq diplomas, certificate and other short programmes in culinary arts, pastry and bakery and food & beverage service that cultivates global chefs and f&b professionals. cookery magic, 179 haig road, ☎ +65 63489667 ([email protected]), [x]. cooking classes in an old colonial black-and-white home, with themes varying by day and cuisines from all over the continent. 8 students maximum. from $65. palate sensations, 1 westbourne road #03-05, ☎ +65 64799025 ([email protected]), [x]. hands-on cooking classes in both european and asian styles, held in a colonial black and white bungalow in rural western singapore. 12 students maximum. from $100.

work[edit]

casual work is nearly impossible to come by, as you must have a work permit (wp) or employment pass (ep) to work in singapore. in practice, receiving either requires that you have a firm job offer and the sponsoring company applies on your behalf. there is also a working holiday programme [30] for recent university grads who want to live in singapore for up to 6 months.

note: there is no minimum wage except cleaners who have a minimum wage of 1,000 singapore dollars per month and security guards who have a minimum wage of 1,100 sgd per month

work permits are mostly intended for menial, low-skilled labourers. to be eligible for an employment pass, you would generally need to have a minimum salary of more than $3,600 per month and hold at least a bachelor degree from a reasonably reputable university. there is also an intermediate known as the s pass, which is usually granted to mid-skilled workers who have been promoted to positions of junior leadership such as worksite supervisor, and would require you to have a minimum salary of more than $2,200 per month as well as your employer's recommendation. employment pass holders as well as s pass holders with a monthly salary of more than $5,000 are allowed to bring in their family members on a dependent pass.

if your employment is terminated, you will get a social visit pass (a visitors visa with no employment rights) which allows you to stay for no longer than 14 days. you can look for another job during this time, but don't overstay your visa, and do not think about working without the right papers, this will result in a short stay in the local prison, with added fines, possibly caning and certain deportation. for more information, contact the ministry of manpower [31].

once you have been working in singapore for a year or so with an employment pass or s pass, applying for permanent residence (pr) is fairly straightforward. if granted — and the rule of thumb is, the higher your salary, the more likely you are to get it — you can stay in singapore indefinitely (as long as you can show some income every 5 years) and can change jobs freely.

as one of the most vibrant economies in south-east asia, and supported by a highly-educated population of locals and foreign talents, singapore is a natural choice for multi-nationals who wish to have a presence in the region. the government is also highly supportive of entrepreneurship in the country, offering a full 3-year tax exemption on profit for new companies (for the first s$100,000) and having one of the lowest corporate tax rates in the world at 17% a year. even the company incorporation process [32] is done entirely online these days and can be completed as quickly as within a day.

singapore also has one of the most active coworking scenes in the region. with over a hundred coworking spaces across the island offering anything from a hot desk for a day to sufficient office space for multinational corporations, you can choose from a wide variety of vibes and styles to suit your business. for a comprehensive list of available coworking spaces, serviced offices and office spaces in singapore, you can check out gorillaspace singapore.

stay safe[edit]

fine-tuning the mrt

the singapore police force is the primary law enforcement agency for the island country. singapore civil defence force is the primary fire-rescue-paramedics serving the country. singapore immigration checkpoints authority checks all travelers and items coming into singapore by air,land or sea. singapore has strict laws against corruption. police and government officials can be trusted and helpful. bribing a cop will result in arrest and prosecution. be aware that the country has sophisticated cctv located throughout the island monitored by the singapore police force. public transport, singapore mass rapid transit is also very safe with cctv and public transport command officers a specialized division of the singapore police force which patrols all mass rapid tranist stations as well as bus stations and interchange to call in an emergency situation if you need police call 999 if you need fire or rescue call 995.

singapore is one of the safest major city-state in the world by virtually any measure. most people, including single female travellers, will not face any problems walking along the streets alone at night. police are also noticeably absent from streets. but as the local police say, "low crime does not mean no crime" — beware of pickpockets in crowded areas and don't forget your common sense entirely. the singapore police force has mainly tracked down and eliminated secret societies(gangs) and there are very few seceret societies though perfectly safe, local women tend to stick to the main road and avoid walking alone through the "lorongs" in geylang, the red light district of singapore, to stay clear of unwanted attention at night. this is not to say they avoid the area completely. the area is, among several others, well-known for its late night local food fare. if you are dressed conservatively (to avoid being mistaken for a sex worker) or look the part of a tourist, you will not be harassed. pay particular care in the central business district area, as there have been individuals from south asia who attempt variations of the "lucky face scam" on both tourists and locals even in public areas. avoid sharing personal information or engaging with them, and if you are followed, move to a crowded area and report to the police.

singapore's cleanliness is achieved in part by strict regulations against public nuisance activities that are rarely enforced in other countries. for example, jay-walking, spitting, littering, and drinking and eating on public transport are prohibited. look around for sign boards detailing the don'ts and the fines associated with these offences, and heed them. avoid littering, as offenders are not only subject to fines, but also to a "corrective work order", in which offenders are made to wear a bright yellow jacket and pick up rubbish in public places. enforcement is however sporadic at best, and it is not uncommon to see people openly litter, spit, smoke in non-smoking zones, etc. chewing gum, famously long banned from sale (consumption was never banned, contrary to popular belief), is now available in limited quantities but only in certain varities at pharmacies for medical purposes (eg nicotine gum). if you ask for it directly, show your id and sign the register. while importing gum for resale and spitting out old chewing gum on the ground is still illegal with penalties of a year in prison and/or fines, one can usually bring in a few packs for personal consumption.

lgbtq[edit]

singapore’s population is largely conservative, so public displays of affection are frowned upon, and in the case of gay couples, perhaps even viewed in contempt or disgust. however, the law banning homosexual sex has been recently lifted. lgbtq people can go about their daily lives relatively undisturbed as long as they stay discreet. while acceptance of lgbtq people is growing, it is still in its infancy stages, and many people are still uncomfortable with the idea of homosexuality although discrimination still exists including in public accommodation and services.

drugs[edit]

warning: singapore treats drug offences with extreme severity. the death penalty is mandatory for those convicted of trafficking, manufacturing, importing or exporting more than 1,200 grams (42 oz) of opium, morphine 30 grams, heroin 15 grams, cannabis and cannabis mixture 500 grams, cannabis resin 100 grams, cocaine 30 grams, meth 250 grams and hash 200 grams. if you are caught with drugs not enough to be eligible for the death penalty expect a life sentence and caning to be imposed by the courts. for unauthorised consumption, there is a maximum of 10 years jail or fine of $20,000 or both. you can be charged for unauthorised consumption as long as traces of illicit drugs are found in your system, even if you can prove that they were consumed outside the country, and you can be charged for trafficking as long as drugs are found in bags that are in your possession or in your room, even if they aren't yours and regardless of whether you're aware of them. therefore, be vigilant of your possessions.

be aware that e-cigerattes are illegal in singapore for importation and personal use, and ica will seize all e-cigarattes upon entry.

crimes[edit]

warning: singapore imposes caning as a possible punishment for over 35 criminal offences, including illegal entry and overstaying your visa for over 90 days. other offences which have caning as a punishment along with imprisonment include vandalism, armed robbery and outrage of modesty(sexual assault). committing outrage of modesty on a person can result in imprisonment term of up to 2 years, fines and caning. committing outrage of modesty on a person younger than 14 can result in a longer sentence of up to 5 years, in addition to fines and caning. this is no slap on the wrist: strokes from the thick rattan cane are excruciatingly painful, take weeks to heal and can scar for life. crimes such as murder, kidnapping, unauthorized possession of firearms and drug trafficking are punishable by death.

however, tourists should be relieved that such severe punishment is only reserved for the most severe crimes such as outrage of modesty, vandalism, murder or kidnapping and this has partly resulted in a country that has seen the lowest number of severe crimes in the world.

public demonstrations are illegal under singapore law. singapore police force take serious actions against protest even if its only 1 or 2 people. the only place where you can legally hold a demonstration is at speakers corner in hong lim park. you must obtain a police permit prior to the protest. illegal protests will be shut down immediately and you will be asked to move on. refusal to do so will result in fines or arrest.

begging is illegal in singapore, but you'll occasionally see beggars on the streets. most are not singaporean — even the "monks" & "nuns" dressed in robes, who occasionally pester tourists for donations, are usually bogus.

whilst jaywalking is illegal, it is still a common thing and occurs quite often around the city. beware though that if a police officer catches you, you might get a warning or end up with a fine if you persist. put simply: the roads are for vehicles and the footpaths are for people.

while singapore provides a constitutional right to "freedom of expression", there are many exceptions that act to limit this right, including several exceptions related to political activism & public demonstrations (particularly by non citizens). nevertheless, the police generally do not arrest people for expressing anti-government views in casual conversation and articles critical of certain government policies are sometimes published in the local newspaper \forums. visitors need not be worried unless you plan to hold a public rally or publish political opinion pieces critical of the current leaders. missionaries should also note that insulting other religions is a crime in singapore, and carries fines and a prison sentence with it, so be sensitive when discussing subjects related to religion.

politics, especially the immigration policy is a very sensitive subject - although police won't arrest you for discussing those with locals, singapore has a peculiar political climate in which it's way too easy to step on a slippery slope when engaging in a discourse in those areas. although locals themselves sometimes feel frustrated and displaced by the combination of mass immigration, their liability for the two year long national service, some institutionalized discrimination and soaring property prices, they are often patriotic and may take offense if visitors criticize any aspect of the country. politics and social dynamics are a subject best avoided and if you happen to get drafted into it by a taxi driver, it's best to stay neutral and just listen.

singapore is virtually immune to natural disasters: there are no fault lines nearby, although indonesia's earthquakes can sometimes be barely felt. its proximity to the equator shields it from typhoons, and nearby landmasses protect it from tsunamis. flooding in the november-january monsoon season is an occasional hazard, especially in low-lying parts of the east coast, but any water usually drains off quickly, usually after a couple of hours, and life continues as normal. extreme air pollution, particularly from forest fires in indonesia, have been a frequent and growing issue. air quality measurements have often indicated an air quality level that is hazardous.

because of rigid regulations, conscientiously enforced with large fines, traffic is less erratic than in other asian countries and reckless driving is rare.

due to singapore being an island wide country the singapore civil defence has installed fallout shelters along many train stations, school, office and public buildings along with a public warning system in the rare event of an natural disaster or a civil emergency. the scdf activates the sirens on february 15 (total defence) and september 15th (civil defence day) and also for testing. sirens have also been activated for occasional public drills and noon chimes. scdf also test the chimes every 1st working day of the month.

emergency numbers[edit]

ambulance ☎ 995 fire ☎ 995 police (main number for emergency services) ☎ 999 singapore general hospital ☎ +65 6222 3322 drug & poison information centre ☎ +65 6423 9119 jireh heart centre dr alvin ng chee keong ☎ +65 +65 6909 6221

stay healthy[edit]

tap water is safe for drinking, and sanitation standards are very high. as a tropical country, singapore is hot and humid so drink lots of water. the lowest temperature ever recorded in singapore was way back in 1934, when it hit a low of 19.4°c (66.9°f).

malaria is not an issue, but dengue fever is endemic to this region. singapore maintains strict mosquito control (leaving standing water around can get you fined), but the government's reach does not extend into the island's nature reserves, so if you're planning on hiking bring along mosquito repellent.

medical care[edit]

the standard of medical care in singapore is much more advanced than other countries located in southeast asia. in fact, singapore’s medical care is regarded as world class, and is a well known location for medical tourism. many people from other countries travel or medically evacaute to singapore to get treated. doctors and nurses are well trained and can speak many languages. despite the lower prices, standards are often as good as those in the west at both public and private clinics, making this a good place to get your jabs and tabs if heading off into the jungle elsewhere. you'll still want to make sure your insurance is in order before a prolonged hospitalization and/or major surgery.

there are various different types of insurance depending on what you are looking for from basic travel insurance policies to longer term health insurance policies designed more for frequent travellers from providers.

for minor ailments, head down to the nearest suburban shopping mall or hdb shopping district and look for a general practitioner (gp). they usually receive patients without appointment and can prescribe drugs on the spot, and the total cost of a consultation, medicine included, is around s$50. for larger problems, head to a hospital.

mount elizabeth hospital, mount elizabeth (off orchard rd), ☎ +65 67372666, [x]. singapore's largest private hospital and a popular destination for medical tourists. consultations with specialists start from $100. singapore general hospital, college road, 1st-3rd hospital avenue (right next to mrt outram park), [x]. singapore's oldest and largest public hospital. outram polyclinic [1] offers doctor's consultations for $20.30 and can refer patients to specialists at the hospital, although waiting times can be long; afternoons are better than mornings. open mon-fri 8 am to 4:30 pm. tan tock seng hospital, 11 jalan tan tock seng (mrt novena), ☎ +65 62566011, [x]. one of singapore's largest public hospitals, fully equipped to handle most anything. specialist departments here include a one-stop travellers' health & vaccination centre for immunizations, malaria prophylaxis, pre-trip and post-trip evaluations and general advice. flat $80 fee for doctor's consultation, vaccines for $10 plus cost (consultation unnecessary), tel. +65 63572222, open 8am-1pm and 2pm-5pm weekdays, 8am-noon sa, no appointment needed.(fourth floor, free coffee!)

medical overpayment scam: your hospital will provide you with an estimate not an exact amount for surgeries and other procedures. your doctor will encourage you to overpay and say that the excess will be refunded. it will. however, the hospitals take three weeks to arrive at a final tally and then at that time will only give you your refund in cash, by hand, at the hospital, long after most medical tourists have left singapore. you can wire money in, in u.s. dollars or euros to pay, but they will only wire the excess back in singapore dollars which no foreign bank will accept. your doctor gets to keep whatever is leftover. pay the minimum with bank wire or credit card then supplement with cash as needed.

alternatively, practitioners of traditional chinese medicine (tcm) are widespread in singapore. eu yan sang [33] runs a chain of over 20 clinics, while the singapore chinese physicians' association [34] offers a directory of tcm physicians.

toilets[edit]

nearly all shopping centres, hotels, mrt stations, bus interchanges, and hawker centres are likely to have public toilets. being clean, mcdonald's toilets are popular too. a packet of tissue may come in handy if the toilet paper has run out. if needed, many public toilets even have vending machines just outside them with toilet paper for purchase. most toilets have bowls, but there is usually one squatting cubicle in every public toilet.

respect[edit]

things to do[edit]

what's in a name? - chinese place their family name first, so phua chu kang is mr. phua for business and chu kang (or just ck) to his friends. many have western names, so he may also be known as terry phua. - malay names are given name + bin or binti (son/daughter) + father's name. mohammed bin abdullah would usually be called mr. mohammed. sometimes, the person's given name appears after the mohammed (example: mohammed faizal bin mohammed nasser) so, in such a case, he would usually be addressed as mr. faizal. - indian names are complex, but the south indian (tamil) names usually found in singapore have two patterns: either given name + s/o or d/o (son of/daughter of) + father's name, or father's initial + given name. given names are often long and may be abbreviated, so ramanathan s/o sellapan uses the name s.r. nathan and would addressed as mr. nathan. the foolproof method is to ask how the person wants to be addressed.

singaporeans care little about formal politeness. what would be decent behavior at home, wherever home might be, is unlikely to offend anyone in singapore. in singapore, unlike much of southeast asia, women wearing revealing clothing or men wearing shorts and slippers are perfectly acceptable. that said, upmarket bars and restaurants may enforce dress codes and singaporeans tend to be more socially conservative than westerners, meaning that public display of affection is still frowned upon and toplessness for women is not acceptable anywhere, even on the beach.

people are generally friendlier in the heartlands, and it is not uncommon to see shopkeepers and customers of multiple races bantering. however, singaporeans, while not hostile towards foreigners, are generally not overly receptive to any overbearing friendliness from them. furthermore, the local dialect with its heavy chinese influences may appear brusque or even rude, but it should not be interpreted as being hostile or offensive. a question such as "you want beer or not?" is a perfectly normal way of asking if you want beer; after all, the person asking you the question is offering you a choice, not making a demand.

if invited to somebody's house, always remove your shoes before you enter as most singaporeans do not wear their shoes at home. socks are perfectly acceptable though, as long as they are not dirty. many places of worship also require you to remove your shoes before you enter.

at train stations, some forms of etiquette are a must. singaporeans are orderly and will usually give way to passengers getting off trains before boarding the train. it is also common for people to stand on the left of escalators to allow room for others to ascend or descend on the right.

beware of taboos if bringing gifts. any products (food or otherwise) involving animals may cause offence and are best avoided, as are white flowers (usually reserved for funerals). knives and clocks are also symbols of cutting ties and death, respectively, and some chinese are superstitious about the number four. also note that in singapore, it is considered rude to open a gift in front of the person who gave it to you. instead, wait till the person has left and open it in private. many singaporean muslims and some hindus abstain from alcohol.

swastikas are commonly seen in buddhist and hindu temples, as well as among the possessions of buddhists and hindus. it is regarded as a religious symbol and does not represent nazism or anti-semitism. as such, western visitors should not feel offended on seeing a swastika in the homes of their hosts, and many locals will wonder what the fuss is all about.

take dietary restrictions into account when inviting singaporean friends for a meal. many indians (and a few chinese) are vegetarian. most malays, being muslims, eat only halal food, while most indians, being hindu, abstain from beef.

do not be surprised if a local child refers to you as “auntie” or “uncle”. singaporeans frequently use these terms as a sign of respect when addressing older adults. when addressing the elderly, it is acceptable to refer to them the same way. or if you’re uncomfortable with that, “sir” or “m’am” is acceptable as well. it is ill-advised to address a much older stranger by their first name, as it might be seen as disrespectful. it is also common courtesy to thank the elderly cleaners at hawker centres who might collect your used dishes from you.

recycling is still at its infancy stage in singapore. look out for blue recycling bins and place clean and dry recyclables such as plastic bottles or aluminium cans into these bins. place general waste into green general waste bins. if in doubt, place items (especially containers with food) into the general waste bins to minimise contamination of recyclables. in shopping malls, it is not uncommon to see segregated recycling bins but these are subsequently commingled (placed together) in one recycling bin at the backend. minimise single use disposables by bringing your own cup (especially for bubble tea or coffee at places like starbucks for a small rebate).

business[edit]

the standard greeting is a firm handshake. however, muslims avoid touching the opposite sex, so a man meeting a muslim woman should let her offer her hand first and a woman meeting a malay man should wait for him to offer his hand. if they opt to place their hand on the heart and bow slightly instead, just follow suit. singaporeans generally do not hug, especially if it is someone they have just met, and doing so would probably make your host feel awkward, though the other person will probably be too polite to say anything as saving face is a major asian value.

for men, standard business attire is a long-sleeved shirt and a tie, although the tie is often omitted, the shirt's collar button opened instead. jackets are rarely worn because it is too hot most of the time. women usually wear western business attire, but a few prefer malay-style kebaya and sarong.

business cards are always exchanged when people meet for business for the first time: hold yours with both hands by the top corners, so the text faces the recipient, while simultaneously receiving theirs. (this sounds more complicated than it is.) study the cards you receive and feel free to ask questions; when you are finished, place them on the table in front of you, not in a shirt pocket or wallet, and do not write on them or otherwise show disrespect.

business gifts are generally frowned on. small talk and bringing up the subject indirectly are neither necessary nor expected. most meetings get straight down to business.

things to avoid[edit]

singaporeans in general are patriotic and nationalistic, and would view any criticisms of their country with varying degrees of hostility. to avoid getting into the bad raps of your hosts, it is advisable to praise the country and avoid bringing up anything negative about it, even if they could tend to have liberal, anti-government views. be respectful of the singapore national anthem (majulah singapura). do not mock or mimick it, as singaporeans are extremely proud and sensitive of their national symbols, and will be very offended. do not desecrate the singapore flag. don't put it on places where people sit or stand, don't drag it, don't wrinkle it, don't contaminate it, don't use it as a dress or uniform. not only will locals be very offended, it is a crime. public displays of affection are taboo and will invite unnecessary stares from the public. overt displays of affection are regarded as inappropriate. revealing your orientation openly is very likely to draw stares and whispers. the ability to speak and understand singlish is a key identifier in identifying a “true-blue” local singaporean. as such, any poor attempt to speak or mimic the language might be perceived as insulting or mocking in nature. it is generally advised to avoid attempting to speak singlish with a local until you get to know them a little better. asking locals what various singlish words mean is also highly appreciated. overall, it is never expected for any foreigners to speak or even understand singlish, since most locals would attempt to communicate with you in standard english. singapore, while heavily westernized, ultimately remains socially conservative. as such, westerners are strongly advised against greetings like kissing on the cheeks, and should stick to the much more acceptable practice of shaking hands or simply waving instead.

contact[edit]

by phone[edit]

the international telephone country code in singapore is 65. there are three main telecommunication providers in singapore: singtel [35], starhub [36] and mobileone (m1) [37].

mobile phones are carried by almost everyone in singapore, including many young children, and coverage is generally excellent throughout the country. all 3 service providers have both gsm 900/1800 and 3g (w-cdma) networks, and international roaming onto them may be possible; check with your operator before you leave to be sure. prepaid sim cards are sold in 7-eleven convenience stores, phone shops and currency exchange counters, just bring your own gsm/3g phone or buy a cheap used handset in singapore. you will need to show an international passport or singapore id to sign up.

a local phone call costs between $0.05-$0.25 per min, whereas each local text message (sms) costs about $0.05, with international sms about $0.15-$0.25 (but a few dozen local sms are usually thrown in for free when you top up). you may also be charged for incoming calls. most prepaid cards expire within 6 mth unless you top-up (which can be done outside singapore). the carriers also offer special top up cards that will give a higher number of minutes for the price at the downside of expiring more quickly. as in many places, mobile data with on prepaid voice sim cards can be ridiculously expensive. starhub offers a 1gb package (valid for 30 days). it costs $25 and is aimed at blackberrys but works with any phone. using the starhub sim, call *122# and follow the menu to activate. data-only sims can be more affordable. for short stays, starhub has 2mbps unlimited service at s$15 per week. for longer stays, bring a microsim adapter and you can get starhub's 2gb package (good for 60 days) for $37.

public phones are an increasingly hard to find outdoors, but you can find them in most mrt stations. they are either coin-operated pay phones (10 cents for a three-minute local call), card phones operated by phone cards in denominations of $3, $5, $10, $20 and $50, or credit card phones. phone cards are available at all post offices and from phonecard agents. most coin-operated pay phones are for local calls only, there are some which accept coins of larger denominations and can be used for overseas calls. credit card phones are usually found at the airport or in some major hotels.

to make an international call from singapore, dial the access code 001 (for singtel), 002 (for m1), and 008 (for starhub), followed by the country code, area code and party's number. recently the providers have started offering cheaper rates for calls using internet telephony routes. the access codes for this cheaper service are 019 and 013 for singtel and 018 for starhub, make sure you input these codes instead of the "+" sign at the beginning of the number if you wish to use these services.

calling cards are also available for specific international destinations and are usually cheaper. hello card from singtel offers a very cheap rate to 8 countries (bangladesh, china, india, indonesia, myanmar, philippines, sri lanka and thailand).

stay connected[edit]

internet cafes charge around $2/hr are scattered about the island, but are not particularly common since almost all locals have internet access at home, work, and/or school. head to chinatown or little india if you need get online, or check out the top floors of many suburban malls, which feature internet cafes doubling as online gaming parlors. alternatively, all public libraries [38] offer cheap internet access ($0.03/min or $1.80/hr), but you need to jump through registration hoops to get access.

the first phase of the nationwide free wireless@sg system is now operating and visitors are free to use the system, although you must register and receive a password via e-mail or a mobile phone first. see the infocomm development authority website [39] for a current list of hotspots. commercial alternatives include mcdonalds, which offers free wifi at most outlets; starhub, a member of the wireless broadband alliance with hotspots at coffee bean cafes; and singtel, which has hotspots at most starbucks cafes. roaming or prepaid rates are on the order of $0.10/min.

there are several options for prepaid 3g/hspa internet. starhub maxmobile [40] has different plans from s$2/hour to s$25 for 5 days unlimited 7.2mbps internet. sim costs s$12. m1 prepaid broadband offers unlimited internet access for three days/five days at s$18/s$30 [41].

mobile internet access is also available from the different telecoms which offer hundreds of megabytes good for several days. however do try using the free wifi access if possible; not only will it save you money but also precious battery life.

there are other more convenient and easy-to-use alternatives for travelers who want to stay connected in order to communicate with their relatives and share the highlights of their stay in singapore. nowadays, travelers can stay connected wherever they go and without roaming costs thanks to small portable 3g/4g wi-fi router that fits in your pocket. several companies such as miowifi [42] offers internet packages at very attractive prices which allow you to connect up to 10 devices at the same time to your wifi device.

recently another possibility is available to travelers to singapore even more convenient than the previous one. as part of the digital age, a new mobile application has just been created: flynetapp [43]. this application allows you to access a 3g / 4g connection when you're travelling to singapore simply by downloading the application from the apple store or the play store.

by mail[edit]

singpost has offices throughout the island, generally open 08:30-17:00 weekdays, 08:30-13:00 saturdays, closed sundays. the changi airport t2 (transit side) office is open 06:00-23:59 daily, while the 1 killeney rd branch is open until 21:00 weekdays and 10:00-16:00 sundays. service is fast and reliable. a postcard to anywhere in the world costs 50 cents, and postage labels can also be purchased from the self-service sam machines found in many mrt stations.

small packets up to 2kg cost $3.50/100g for airmail, or $1/100g for surface mail. for larger packages, dhl may offer competitive rates.

cope[edit]

electricity[edit]

singapore uses the british bs1363 three-pin rectangular socket (230v/50hz). plug adaptors are available at any hardware store.